---
tags:
  - chapter
  - fouranal
date: 2025-01-13
completed: true
---
[[Directory]], [[Fourier Analysis 1|Subject Directory]]
[[1. Introduction and Preliminaries from Real Analysis|🞀🞀]] [[|◀]] [[2. Fourier Series and Dirichlet Kernel|▶]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Fourier Analysis/Lectures/22. |🞂🞂]]
# Fourier Analysis
## Motivation
Let ${} f:\mathbb{R}\to{}\mathbb{R} {}$ such that $f {}$ is periodic, for instance with a period of ${} 2\pi {}$: ${} f(x+2\pi)=f(x) {}$. We want to represent this function in terms of the simplest periodic functions, that is, sines and cosines. In particular, 
$$
\begin{align}
\sin (nx),\, \cos (nx),\, n \in \mathbb{Z}
\end{align}
$$
This is done by writing
$$
f(x)=\sum_{n=-\infty }^{\infty} a_{ n} \sin (nx)+b_{n} \cos (nx)
$$
in fact, this can be done for any ${} 2\pi {}$-periodic function. This is called a Fourier series. For most of the course we shall be dealing with the complex form, i.e.
$$
e^{inx}=\cos (nx)+i\sin (nx)
$$
and so we will be representing 
$$
f(x)=\sum_{n=-\infty }^{\infty} c_{n}e^{inx}
$$
It turns out that there is an explicit formula for the $c_{ n}$:
$$
c_{n}=\frac{1}{2\pi}\int_{-\pi}^{\pi} f(x)e^{-inx} \ud x 
$$
This is the first part of the course

The second part of the course deals with Fourier integrals. This is a continuous version of a Fourier series, in a sense. We will write
$$
f(x)=\int_{-\infty }^{\infty} \hat{f}(\xi)e^{2\pi i\xi x} \ud \xi 
$$
where
$$
\hat{f}(\xi)=\int_{-\infty }^{\infty} f(x)e^{-2\pi i\xi x} \ud x 
$$
and we will of course discuss applications. 
### Technical Issues
The main technical issue will the the convergence of the Fourier series
## Continuity and Uniform Continuity
### Definition 1.1: Continuity
Let ${} f:[a,\, b]\to{}\mathbb{R} {}$. We say that ${} f {}$ is continuous on ${} [a,\, b] {}$ if
$$
\forall \varepsilon>0:\forall x \in [a,\, b]:\exists \delta>0:|x-x'|<\delta \Rightarrow  |f(x)-f(x')|<\varepsilon
$$
Note in particular that $\delta$ depends on both $x$ and $\varepsilon {}$. 
### Definition 1.2: Uniform Continuity
Let ${} f:[a,\, b]\to{}\mathbb{R} {}$. We say that $f {}$ is uniformly continuous on ${} [a,\, b] {}$ if
$$
\forall \varepsilon>0:\exists \delta>0:\forall x \in [a,\, b]:|x-x'|<\delta \Rightarrow  |f(x)-f(x')|<\varepsilon
$$
and note tat $\delta$ depends only ${} \varepsilon {}$.
#### Example:
Let ${} f(x)=\sin (x^{2}) {}$. This is continuous, but is not uniformly continuous, 
### Theorem 1.3: Cantor's Theorem
If $f$ is continuous on ${} [a,\, b] {}$, then it is uniformly continuous on ${} [a,\, b] {}$. 
#### Proof:
See real analysis lecture notes
## Series of Functions
Let ${} \{ f_{n}(x) \}_{n=0}^{\infty}  {}$ be such that ${} f_{n}$ are continuous on ${} [a,\, b] {}$. We have 2 notions of convergence:
- Pointwise convergence:
$$
\forall x \in [a,\, b]:f_{n}(x)\to{}f_{\infty }(x), \text{ as } n\to{}\infty 
$$
$$
\forall x \in [a,\, b]: \forall \varepsilon>0:\exists N \in \mathbb{N}:\forall n \geq N:|f_{n}(x)-f_{\infty }(x)|<\varepsilon
$$
- Unform convergence:
$$
\forall \varepsilon>0:\exists N \in \mathbb{N}: \forall n \geq N:\forall  x \in [a,\, b]: | f_{n}(x)-f_{\infty }(x)|<\varepsilon
$$
#### Example:
Let ${} f(x)=e^{-x^{2}} {}$, and let ${} f_{n}(x)=f(x-n) {}$. Then ${} f_{n} \to{}0 {}$ pointwise. as eventually the peak of the curves will be past every point, and it will form a bounded monotonic sequence. However, it does not converge uniformly. 

Now let ${} f_{n}(x)=\frac{1}{n}f(x-n) {}$. Then ${} f_{n}\to{}0 {}$ uniformly as well as pointwise. 

Now if ${} \{ f_{n} \}_{n=0}^{\infty}  {}$, then let ${} F_{N}(x)=\sum_{n=0}^{N} f_{n}(x) {}$. 
### Theorem 1.4: Weierstrass M-test
If ${} |f_{n}(x)|\leq M_{n},\,  x \in [a,\, b] {}$, where ${} \sum_{n=0}^{\infty} M_{n} {}$ converges, then ${} F_{N}(x)$ converges uniformly. 
#### Proof:
See real analysis lecture notes

Now if ${} \sum_{n=0}^{\infty} f_{n}(x) {}$ converges uniformly on ${} [a,\, b] {}$, then 
$$
\int_{a}^{b} \sum_{n=0}^{\infty} f_{n}(x) \ud x=\sum_{n=0}^{\infty} \int_{a}^{b} f_{n}(x) \ud x 
$$

Now if each ${} f_{n} {}$ is differentiable, and both ${} \sum_{n=0}^{\infty} f_{n}(x) {}$ and ${} \sum_{n=0}^{\infty} f_{n}'(x) {}$ converge uniformly, then 
$$
\frac{d}{dx} \sum_{n=0}^{\infty} f_{n}(x)=\sum_{n=0}^{\infty} \frac{d}{dx} f_{n}(x)
$$
