---
tags:
  - dynamical_systems1
  - chapter
date: 2024-01-26
---
[[Directory]], [[Intro to Dynamical Systems 1|Subject Directory]]
[[4. Peano's and Picard's Theorems|Last]] ;; [[6.|Next]]
# Finding ODE from the solution
### General Technique
Given a general solution of the form
$$
y(x,\, C)
$$
in order to find the original ODE, solve in terms of $C$, and differentiate. 
#### Example:
$$
y(x)=\frac{1}{x}+Cx
$$
Now we have
$$
\begin{align}
 C & =\frac{y}{x}-\frac{1}{x^{2}}  \\
  0 & =\frac{dy}{dx} \cdot \frac{1}{x}-\frac{y}{x^{2}}+\frac{2}{x^{3}} \\
\frac{dy}{dx}  & =\frac{y}{x}-\frac{2}{x^{2}}
 \end{align}
$$
## Typical Form of Solutions:
### Explicit:
$$
\frac{dy}{dx} =f(x)\quad \Rightarrow\quad  y(x)=F(x)+c
$$
### Separable:
$$
\frac{dy}{dx} =f(x)g(y)\quad \Rightarrow \quad y(x)=G^{-1}(F(x)+C)
$$
### Linear:
$$
\frac{dy}{dx} =f(x)y+g(x)\quad \Rightarrow \quad y(x)=F(x)+cG(x)
$$
### Homogenous:
$$
\frac{dy}{dx} =f\left( \frac{y}{x} \right)\quad \Rightarrow \quad y(x)=xF(xC)
$$
# Second Order ODEs
## Basic Ideas
### General Form
$$
\frac{d^{2}x}{dt^{2}} =g\left( t,\, x,\, \frac{dx}{dt}  \right) 
$$
### Solution
Any function ${} h(t) {}$ that satisfies
$$
\frac{d^{2}h(t)}{dt^{2}}  =g\left( t,\, h(t),\, \frac{dh(x)}{dt}  \right)
$$
### General Solution
The general solution is a family of functions of the form
$$
h(t,\, C_{1},\, C_{2})
$$
### Initial Value Problems:
Since we have 2 constants, we have 2 conditions. In fact, they come in 2 different flavours
1. ${} x(t_{0})=x_{0}\qquad \text{ and } \qquad  x(t_{1})=x_{1} {}$
2. ${} x(t_{0})=x_{0} \qquad \text{ and } \qquad \dot{x}(t_{0})=v_{0} {}$

### Coupled ODE Systems
A second order ODE can always be written in terms of a system of two *coupled* first order ODEs. By coupled we mean a system of the form
$$
\begin{align}
 \frac{dx_{1}}{dt}  & =f_{1}(t,\, x_{1},\, x_{2})   \\
\frac{dx_{2}}{dt} & =f_{2}(t,\, x_{1},\, x_{2})
 \end{align}
$$
Given an initial value problem, we get
$$
\begin{align}
 x_{1}(t_{0}) & =x_{1}^{(0)}   \\
x_{2}(t_{0}) & =x_{2}^{(0)}
 \end{align}
$$
(here ${} x_{i}^{(0)} {}$ means "the initial condition at $0$").
### Rewriting
How do we write a second order ODE as a coupled system?
$$
\frac{d^{2}x}{dt^{2}} =g\left( t,\, x,\, \frac{dx}{dt}  \right) \qquad x(t_{0})=x_{0},\, \dot{x}(t_{0})=v_{0}
$$
Idea: Take
$$
\begin{align}
 x & \mapsto x_{1}  \\
\frac{dx}{dt}  & \mapsto x_{2} 
 \end{align}
$$
Then
$$
\frac{ dx_{1} }{ dt }=x_{2}
$$
and
$$
\frac{dx_{2}}{dt}=\frac{d^{2}x_{1}}{dt^{2}}  =\frac{d^{2}x}{dt^{2}} =g(t,\, x_{1},\, x_{2}) 
$$
So our system looks like
$$
\begin{cases}
\displaystyle\frac{dx_{1}}{dt}=x_{2} \\
\displaystyle\frac{dx_{2}}{dy}=g(t,\, x_{1},\, x_{2})
\end{cases}
$$
and the initial conditions give us
$$
\begin{align}
 x_{1}(t_{0}) & =x_{0}   \\
x_{2}(t_{0}) & =v_{0}
 \end{align}
$$
#### Example:
$$
\frac{d^{2}x}{dt^{2}} =2\frac{dx}{dt} +3x^{2}t 
$$
Now
$$
\begin{align}
 \frac{dx_{1}}{dt} & =x_{2} \\
\frac{dx_{2}}{dt} & =g(t,\, x_{1},\, x_{2}) \\
 & =2x_{2}+3x_{1} ^{2}t
 \end{align}
$$
## Second Order Linear ODE with Constant Coefficients
This will be the *only* second order ODE that we will solve
### General Form
$$
\frac{d^{2}x}{dt^{2}} +a\frac{dx}{dt} +bx=g(t) 
$$
with ${} a,\, b {}$ constant. One can show that
$$
L(x)=\frac{d^{2}x}{dt^{2}} + a \frac{dx}{dt} +bx 
$$
is a linear map. Now we have 
$$
\begin{align}
L(x) & =g(t) &  &  \text{ \emph{in}homogeneous linear} \\
L(x) & =0 &  & \phantom{\text{in}}\text{ homogeneous linear}
\end{align}
$$
The homogenous equation has several nice properties:
1. If ${} x(t)$ is a solution, then ${} Cx(t) {}$ is also a solution
2. if ${} x_{1}(t) {}$ and ${} x_{2}(t)$ are solutions, then ${} \alpha x_{1}(t)+\beta x_{2}(t) {}$ is also a solution, since $L$ is linear.

We can mirror these properties in an *in*homogenous equation:
1. If ${} x_{1}(t) {}$ and ${} x_{2}(t)$ are solutions, then their difference satisfies the homogenous equation, i.e. they belong to the same coset and are therefore equal to *a* solution plus some general solution of the homogenous equation. More precisely, 
$$
Lx_{1}=Lx_{2}\Rightarrow  L(x_{1}-x_{2})=0\Rightarrow x_{1}-x_{2} \in \ker L
$$
Now given a representative ${} x_{\mathrm{pi}}(t) {}$ is a solution to the inhomogeneous equation, then the space of solutions to the inhomogeneous equation is
$$
x_{\mathrm{pi}}(t)+\ker L
$$
## How to Solve
### General Theory
Note that this method helps with understanding, but is not a practical method.
We may write
$$
\begin{align}
 L=\frac{d^{2}}{dt^{2}} +a \frac{d}{dt} +b & =\left( \frac{d}{dt} -\lambda_{1} \right)\left( \frac{d}{dt} -\lambda_{2} \right)    \\
 & =\frac{d^{2}}{dt^{2}} -(\lambda_{1}+\lambda_{2})\frac{d}{dt}  +\lambda_{1} \lambda_{2}
 \end{align}
$$
To find $\lambda_{1}$ and $\lambda_{2}$, we note that
$$
(\lambda-\lambda_{1})(\lambda-\lambda_{2})=0\qquad \Rightarrow \qquad \lambda^{2}+a\lambda+b=0
$$
we can then solve using the usual methods. This equation is called the *auxiliary* polynomial, or the *characteristic* polynomial. We can now write
$$
L=L_{1} \circ  L_{2}
$$
where
$$
\begin{align}
L_{1} & =\left( \frac{d}{dt} -\lambda_{1} \right) \\
L_{2} & =\left( \frac{d}{dt} -\lambda_{2} \right)
\end{align}
$$
(it does not matter which way round ${} \lambda_{i} {}$ are)
Now we may subsitute $u=L_{2} {}$, and
$$
\frac{du}{dt} -\lambda_{1} u=g(t)
$$

