---
tags:
  - linear_algebra1
  - chapter
date: 2023-10-16
---
[[Directory]], [[Linear Algebra and Geometry 1|Subject Directory]]
# Matricies
## Introduction
### Notation
The set of all matricies of size $n\times m$ is #todo

We write $a_{ij}$ to be the element in the $i^{\text{th}}$ column and the $j^{\text{th}}$ row.
We may also write $A=(a_{ij})$ as a matrix without a speicified size.
if $\mathbf{a}_{1},\, \mathbf{a}_{2},\, \dots,\, \mathbf{a}_{n}$ are the columns of a matrix $A$, we sometimes write
$$
A=\begin{pmatrix}
\uparrow & \uparrow & \dots & \uparrow \\
\mathbf{a}_{1} & \mathbf{a}_{2} & \dots & \mathbf{a}_{n} \\
\downarrow  & \downarrow & \dots & \downarrow
\end{pmatrix}
$$

# Vector Spaces
## Introduction
### Definition Set Up
In order to define a vector space, we must choose a set of scalar. This set must form a field over the operations $+$, $\times$. In this course, this set will always be either $\mathbb{R}$ or $\mathbb{C}$. We write $\mathbb{F}$ as a placeholder for either of these sets (or a field in general).

For vectors, the only thing that is important about them is that we can multiply by scalars, and add them together. Therefore, we have a vector space being any collection of objects that can be added, and multiplied by a scalar from its associated field. 

### Definition 2.1
A vector space is any collection of objects $V$. An element of $V$ is called a vector. If $\mathbf{v}$ is a vector, then it is a member of a vector space. On $V$ we have 2 operations which are defined:
- Vector addition: $+$. This takes $\mathbf{u},\, \mathbf{v} \in V$ and returns $\mathbf{u}+\mathbf{v}\in V$. $+$ is a binary operation on $V$. We sometimes say that $+$ closes $V$, or that $V$ is closed under addition.
- Scalar multiplication: often denoted without a symbol. Takes $\mathbf{v} \in  V$ and $\alpha \in \mathbb{F}$, and returns $\alpha \mathbf{v}\in V$. We might say that $V$ is closed under scalar multiplication.

In order to be a vector space, $V {}$ and its operations must satisfy the following properties(or rules, or axioms):
#### Addition 
1. ${} \forall \mathbf{u},\, \mathbf{v} \in  V$, ${} \:\:\  \quad\qquad\qquad\mathbf{u}+\mathbf{v}=\mathbf{v}+\mathbf{u} {}$. This is called Commutativity
2. ${} \forall\mathbf{u},\, \mathbf{v},\, \mathbf{w} \in  V {}$, ${} \qquad\qquad(\mathbf{u}+\mathbf{v})+\mathbf{w}=\mathbf{u}+(\mathbf{v}+\mathbf{w}) {}$. This is called Associativity
3. ${} \exists \mathbf{0}\in V,\forall\mathbf{v}\in V {}$ , ${} \quad\qquad\mathbf{0}+\mathbf{v}=\mathbf{v}+\mathbf{0}=\mathbf{v} {}$. This is called the additive identity
4. ${} \forall\mathbf{v} \in  V,\exists -\mathbf{v}\in V,\qquad \mathbf{v}+(-\mathbf{v})=\mathbf{0} {}$. This is called an additive inverse

This means that ${} (V, +) {}$ forms an abelian group
#### Scalar Multiplication
5. ${} \forall \mathbf{v}\in V,\qquad 1\mathbf{v}=\mathbf{v} {}$. , where ${} 1 {}$ is the identity of the field ${} \mathbb{F} {}$. This is called the multiplicative identity
6. $\forall \mathbf{v}\in V, \forall \alpha,\, \beta \in  \mathbb{F},\, \qquad\alpha(\beta \mathbf{v})+(\alpha\beta)\mathbf{v} {}$

Here we have the field $\mathbb{F} {}$ naturally acting on the group ${} (V, +) {}$.
### Distributive properties
7. ${} \forall \alpha \in \mathbb{F}, \forall \mathbf{u},\, \mathbf{v} \in  V,\qquad \alpha(\mathbf{u}+\mathbf{v})=\alpha \mathbf{u}+\alpha \mathbf{v} {}$
8. ${} \forall \alpha,\, \beta \in  \mathbb{F}, \forall \mathbf{v}\in V,\qquad (\alpha+\beta)\mathbf{v}=\alpha \mathbf{v}+\beta \mathbf{v} {}$

#### Note:
In the last property given, 8, the plus on the left hand side and the plus on the right hand side are fundamentally different. One is addition in the field $\mathbb{F}$, and one is addition in the vector space $V$

#### Notation:
If $\mathbb{F}=\mathbb{R} {}$, we say $V$ is a real vector space
if $\mathbb{F}=\mathbb{C}$, we say ${} \mathbb{C} {}$ is a complex vector space

We always say that $V$ is a vector space over $\mathbb{F}$.


### Examples
Some common vector spaces
1. **Column Vectors**: for ${} n \in  \mathbb{N} {}$, ${} \mathbb{F}^{n} {}$ is a vector space over $\mathbb{F}$. In particular ${} \mathbb{F}^{1}=\mathbb{F} {}$ is a vector space over $\mathbb{F}$. 
Note that ${} \mathbb{R}^{n} {}$ is a real vector space *only*. It cannot be over $\mathbb{C}$
However, Note that ${} \mathbb{C}^{n}$ is a vector space over both $\mathbb{C} {}$ or ${} \mathbb{R}$.

#### Observation:
If $V$ is closed under multiplication by all ${} \alpha \in  \mathbb{C}$, then ${} V {}$ is closed under multiplication by all ${} \alpha \in  \mathbb{R} {}$.

#### Remark
Since addition and scalar multiplication are defined entry-wise, and the rules hold necessarily in our field of scalars, the axioms are automatically satisfied. 

2. **Zero Vector Space**: Let $V=\{ \mathbf{0} \}$. Then this is a perfectly good vector space, if a bit trivial. 
3. **Polynomials**: for $n \in\mathbb{N}$, $\mathbb{P}_{n}$ denotes the set of polynomials with degree of at most $n$, aka
$$
P(t)=a_{0}+a_{1}t+a_{2}t^{2}+\dots+a_{n}t^{n}
$$
We can add polynomials:
$$
\begin{align}
P(t)+Q(t) & =(a_{0}+a_{1}t+\dots+a_{n}t^{n})+(b_{0}+b_{1}t+\dots+b_{n}t^{n}) \\
 & =(a_{0}+b_{0})+(a_{1}+b_{1})t+\dots+(a_{n}+b_{n})t^{n}
\end{align}
$$
We can multiply by scalars:
$$
\alpha P(t)=\alpha a_{1}+\alpha a_{2}t+\dots+\alpha a_{n}t^{n}
$$
All the properties of a vector space are automatically fulfilled due to the properties of $\mathbb{F} {}$.
4. Let ${} f(\mathbb{F}, \mathbb{F}) {}$ be the set of all functions ${} f:\mathbb{F}\to{} \mathbb{F} {}$. We can add functions and multiply them by scalars. Then ${} f(\mathbb{F},\, \mathbb{F})$ is a vector space over $\mathbb{F}$. The operations are defined pointwise, so the axioms of a vector space are automatically fulfilled. 

5. **Solutions of differential equations**: An ordinary differential equation, or ODE is an equation involving an unknown function, and its derivatives. A linear ODE is an ODE of the following form:
$$
a_{n}(x)\frac{d^{n}y}{dx^{n}}  +a_{n-1}(x)\frac{d^{n-1}y}{dx^{n-1}}  +\dots+a_{1}(x)+\frac{dy}{dx} +a_{0}(x)y=b(x)
$$
Where ${} a_{0},\, a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{n},\,  b {}$ are known functions. If $b(x)=0 {}$, the the equation is called **homogeneous** (otherwise its called inhomogeneous). The number ${} n {}$ is called its order. 

The set of solutions of a **linear homogenous** ODE is a vector space. *Always*. This is a really important property.

We wont prove this generally. We instead work by example. 
Consider the equation
$$
\frac{d^{2}y}{dx^{2}} +x\frac{dy}{dx} =0 \tag{*} 
$$
Addition: Let ${} y_{1}(x)$ and ${} y_{2}(x)$ be solutions of ${} (*) {}$.
$$
\begin{align}
 \frac{d^{2}(y_{1}+y_{2})}{dx^{2}}+x \frac{d(y_{1}+y_{2})}{dx} & =\frac{d^{2}y_{1}}{dx^{2}}+\frac{d^{2}y_{2}}{dx^{2}}+x\left( \frac{dy_{1}}{dx}+\frac{dy_{2}}{dx} \right)   \\
 & =\left( \frac{d^{2}y_{2}}{dx^{2}}+x\frac{dy_{1}}{dx} \right)+\left( \frac{d^{2}y_{2}}{dx^{2}}+x \frac{dy_{2}}{dx} \right) \\
 & =0
 \end{align}
$$
Therefore, $y_{1}+y_{2} {}$ is also a solution of ${} (*)$

Scalar multiplication: let $y$ be a solution to $(*)$ and $\alpha \in \mathbb{F} {}$
$$
\frac{d^{2}(\alpha y)}{dx^{2}}+x \frac{d(\alpha y)}{dx}=\alpha \frac{d^{2}y}{dx^{2}}  +\alpha x \frac{dy}{dx} =\alpha\left( \frac{d^{2}y}{dx^{2}} +x \frac{dy}{dx}   \right)=0
$$
So $\alpha y$ is also a solution of $(*)$. So the set of solutions of $(*)$ is a vector space.

6. **Matrices**:
We define addition and scalar multiplication of matrices entry wise, that is for ${} m\times n {}$ matrices ${} A=(a_{ij}),\, B=(b_{ij}) {}$, and a scalar $\alpha \in \mathbb{F} {}$.
$$
A+b=(a_{ij}+bij)=\begin{pmatrix}
a_{11}+b_{11} & a_{12}+b_{12} & \dots & a_{1n}+b_{1n} \\
 \vdots& \vdots & \ddots & \vdots \\
a_{m1}+b_{m1} & a_{m 2}+b_{m 2} & \dots & a_{mn}+b_{mn}
\end{pmatrix}
$$
$$
\alpha A=(\alpha a_{ij})=\begin{pmatrix}
\alpha a_{11} & \alpha a_{12} & \dots & \alpha a_{1n} \\
\vdots & \vdots & \ddots & \vdots \\
\alpha a_{m1} & \alpha a_{m 2} & \dots & \alpha a_{mn}
\end{pmatrix}
$$
With these operations, ${} M_{m,n}(\mathbb{F}) {}$ is a vector space over $\mathbb{F}$

### Non-Examples
1. **Integers**: We can add them perfectly fine ${} m,\, n \in\mathbb{Z}\Rightarrow m+n \in\mathbb{Z} {}$. But $\mathbb{Z}$ is not closed under scalar multiplication. 
	for example: ${} 3 \in  \mathbb{Z} {}$, but ${} \frac{1}{2}\cdot 3 \notin \mathbb{Z}$.

2. ${} M_{m,n} {}(\mathbb{Z})$, with the same idea as 1.
3. **Unit vectors**: ${} \mathbf{v} \in  \mathbb{F}^{n} {}$ is a unit vector iff ${} \lVert \mathbf{v} \rVert =1 {}$ It is not closed under addition or multiplication: ${} \lVert (1,\, 0)+(0,\, 1) \rVert =\lVert (1,\, 1) \rVert =\sqrt{2}\neq 1 {}$ and ${} \lVert 2(1,\, 0) \rVert =2 {}$
4. **Positive real axis**: $\mathbb{R}_{+}=(0,\, \infty)$. We can add these perfectly fine, but we can't multiply by negative scalars, so ${} \mathbb{R}_{+} {}$ is **not** a vector space. 

#### An interesting example:
We look at $\mathbb{R}_{+}$ again. Now define addition on $\mathbb{R}_{+}$ as follows:
$$
x \conj{+}y=xy
$$
and scalar multiplication by ${} \alpha \in \mathbb{R} {}$ as
$$
\alpha x=x^{\alpha}
$$
Then $\mathbb{R}_{+} {}$, is closed under addition and scalar multiplication. In fact, all the properties are satisfied.
$$
\begin{align}
 \alpha(x\conj{+}y) & =(xy)^{\alpha}   \\
 & =x^{\alpha}y^{\alpha} \\
 & =(\alpha x)\conj{+}(\alpha y)
 \end{align}
$$
Note that ${} \mathbf{0}=1$

Therefore, over these operations, $R_{+}$ is a vector space.