---
tags:
  - chapter
  - alggeo
date: 2025-01-17
completed: true
---
[[Directory]], [[Algebraic Geometry 1|Subject Directory]]
[[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/1. |🞀🞀]] [[|◀]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/2. |▶]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/11. |🞂🞂]]
# Introduction
## Intro
### What is AG about?
The general goal of AG is to study systems of polynomial equations, i.e.:
$$
\begin{align}
p_{1}(x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{ m}) & =0 \\
 & \vdots  \\
p_{n}(x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{m}) & =0
\end{align}
$$
where ${} p_{ i} {}$ are polynomials in $m$ variables. If the ${} p_{i} {}$ are all linear, then this is simply linear algebra. Otherwise, this is extremely challenging. 

In practice, many geometric spaces are defined by polynomials. For instance, the circle is simply the solution set to
$$
x^{2}+y^{2}-1=0
$$

Polynomials are the "simplest" equations, and so they appear everywhere and anywhere. AG allows us to unify different fields, e.g. the unification between number theory and geometry, which comes together to make arithmetic geometry. 
### Goals for today
1. The natural setting for geometry is the projective plane. 
2. (for geometry) $\mathbb{C}$ is better than $\mathbb{R}$. 
## Classification of Conics
Define a quadratic polynomial in $x$ and $y$ is
$$
Q(x,\, y)=ax^{2}+by^{2}+cxy+dx+ey+f
$$
and at least one of ${} a,\, b,\, c\neq 0 {}$. We define a conic to be the zero locus or zero set of $Q$, that is, 
$$
C=\{ (A,\, B)  \in  \mathbb{R}^{2}\mid  Q(A,\, B)=0 \}
$$
There are many "classes" of conic:
1. Ellipses: ${} x^{2}+y^{2}-1=0 {}$
2. Hyperbolae: ${} x^{2}-y^{2}-1=0 {}$
3. Parabolas: ${} x^{2}-y-1=0 {}$
4. The empty set: ${} x^{2}+y^{2}+1=0 {}$
5. The origin: $x^{2}+y^{2}=0 {}$
6. Axes: ${} xy=0 {}$
7. Parallel lines: ${} (x-1)x=0 {}$
8. The double line: ${} (x-1)^{2}=0 {}$
## Real Projective Plane
Idea: Compactify the plane in a geometrically meaningful way. We denote the real projective plane as
$$
\begin{align}
 \mathbb{P}_{\mathbb{R}}^{2} & =\{ \text{lines through the origin in }\mathbb{R}^{3} \}   \\
 & =\{ \text{ratios of the form }[X:Y:Z] \} \\
 & =(\mathbb{R}^{3}-\{ 0 \}) / \sim \qquad\text{where}\qquad  (X,\, Y,\, Z)\sim (tX,\, tY,\, tZ),\, t \in \mathbb{R}-\{ 0 \}
 \end{align}
$$
Notice that any line through the origin is defined by a non-origin point ${} (A,\, B,\, C) {}$. Two points define the same line iff non-zero scalar multiples of each other, i.e. ${} (A,\, B,\, C)\sim (tA,\, tB,\, tC) {}$.

${} \mathbb{P}^{2}_{\mathbb{R}} {}$ has a topology; the quotient topology. That is
$$
U \subseteq \mathbb{P}^{2}_{\mathbb{R}}
$$
is open iff
$$
q^{-1}(U) \subseteq \mathbb{R}^{3}-\{ 0 \}
$$
is open, where ${} q:\mathbb{R}^{3} -\{ 0 \}\to{}\mathbb{P}^{2}_{\mathbb{R}} {}$ is the quotient map. 
### Proposition 1.1: Compactness of the real projective plane
${} \mathbb{P}^{2}_{\mathbb{R}}$ is compact and contains $\mathbb{R}^{2}$ as an open dense subset. 
#### Proof:
(Compactness)
Let ${} p \in \mathbb{P}^{2}_{\mathbb{R}} {}$. $p$ can be represented by a point ${} (X,\, Y,\, Z) \in \mathbb{R}^{3} -\{ 0 \} {}$, but it can also be represented as
$$
\frac{1}{\lVert (X,\, Y,\, Z) \rVert }(X,\, Y,\, Z)  \in S^{2}
$$
Therefore, ${} \mathbb{P}^{2}_{\mathbb{R}} {}$ is the continuous image of a compact set ($S^{2} {}$) and therefore is compact (in fact it is homeomorphic to ${} S^{2} /\pm  {}$).

(Open dense subset)
Let 
$$
U=\{ p \in \mathbb{P}^{2}_{\mathbb{R}} \mid  p \text{ is represented by a point in } \mathbb{R}^{3} -\{ 0 \}\text{ and } Z\neq 0 \}
$$
Now 
$$
q^{-1}(U)=\{ (X,\, Y,\, Z) \in \mathbb{R}^{3} \mid  Z\neq 0 \} \subseteq \mathbb{R}^{3}
$$
which is open and dense in $\mathbb{R}^{3}$, so $U$ is open and dense in ${} \mathbb{P}^{2}_{\mathbb{R}}$. Now if ${} (X,\, Y,\, Z) {}$ represents ${} p \in \mathbb{P}_{\mathbb{R}}^{2} {}$ and ${} p \in U {}$, then ${} \frac{1}{Z}(X,\, Y,\, Z)=\left( \frac{X}{Z},\, \frac{Y}{Z},\, 1 \right) {}$ represents $p$, and it is the unique representative with ${} Z=1 {}$. Therefore, given ${} (X,\, Y) \in \mathbb{R} {}$, we may map
$$
q(X,\, Y,\, 1)\to{}U
$$
therefore, $U\cong \mathbb{R}^{2}$, and so $\mathbb{R}^{2}$ may be embedded as a open and dense set in ${} \mathbb{P}_{\mathbb{R}}^{2}$.

Question: What is ${} \mathbb{P}_{\mathbb{R}}^{2} - U=\mathbb{P}_{\mathbb{R}}' {}$? Topologically, it's a circle, and it's called the "line at infinity". Intuitively, it represents all the ways you can go to infinity.  
### Homogenous Coordinates
Every point in ${} \mathbb{P}_{\mathbb{R}}^{2}$ can be represented by a ratio ${} [X:Y:Z]$ called the homogenous coordinate. For  ${} t \in \mathbb{R} -\{ 0 \} {}$, $[X:Y:Z]$ and ${} [tX:tY:tZ] {}$ are the homogenous coordinates of the same points. 

### Definition 1.2: Homogenous polynomial
A polynomial is called a *homogenous polynomial of degree $k {}$* when each monomial has degree $k$. 
#### Example:
- ${} X^{3}+Y^{3}+Z^{3} {}$: Homogenous of degree $3$
- ${} X^{3}+Y^{2}Z^{2} {}$: Not homogenous
- ${} X^{2}+Y^{2}+2XY {}$: Homogenous of degree $2$.

Equivalently, ${} f(X_{1},\,\dots,\,X_{n}) {}$ is homogenous of degree $k$ iff
$$
f(tX_{1},\,\dots,\,tX_{n})=t^{k}f(X_{1},\,\dots,\,X_{n})
$$
### Lemma 1.3:
Let $f$ be a homogenous polynomial. Then the set 
$$
\{ [X:Y:Z]  \in \mathbb{P}_{\mathbb{R}}^{2} \mid f(X,\, Y,\, Z)=0 \}
$$
is *well defined*. 
#### Proof:
Let ${} [X:Y:Z]=[tX:tY:tZ] {}$. Then 
$$
f(tX,\, tY,\, tZ)=t^{k}f(X,\, Y,\, Z)
$$
and so ${} f(tX,\, tY,\, tZ)=0 {}$ iff ${} f(X,\, Y,\, Z)=0 {}$. 

Observe that if $M:\mathbb{R}^{3}\to{}\mathbb{R}^{3} {}$ is a linear map, then it sends lines through the origin to lines through the origin. Therefore, $M$ induces a map
$$
M:\mathbb{P}_{\mathbb{R}}^{2}\to{}\mathbb{P}_{\mathbb{R}}^{2}
$$
We call this a projective linear transformation. 
## Classify projective conics
By a projective conic, we mean a subset 
$$
C=\{ [X:Y:Z]  \in \mathbb{P}_{\mathbb{R}}^{2} \mid  Q(X,\, Y,\, Z)=0 \}
$$
where ${} Q(X,\, Y,\, Z) {}$ is homogenous of degree two. 
### Proposition 1.4:
Any polynomial that is homogenous of degree two corresponds uniquely to a symmetric ${} 3\times 3 {}$ matrix. 
#### Proof:
Let $A$ be a symmetric ${} 3\times 3 {}$ matrix. Then we may define
$$
Q(X,\, Y,\, Z)=(X,\, Y,\, Z) A (X,\, Y,\, Z)^{^{\mathrm{T}}}
$$
which is a degree $2 {}$ homogenous polynomial. 

Now given a degree ${} 2 {}$ homogenous polynomial:
$$
a_{11}X^{2}+a_{12}XY+a_{13}XZ+a_{22}Y^{2}+a_{23}YZ+a_{33}Z^{2}
$$
we may define
$$
A_{Q}=\begin{pmatrix}a_{11} & \frac{a_{12}}{2} & \frac{a_{13}}{2} \\ \frac{a_{12}}{2} & a_{22} & \frac{a_{23}}{2} \\ \frac{a_{13}}{2} & \frac{a_{23}}{2} & a_{33} \end{pmatrix} 
$$
This defines a bijection and it's inverse
### Theorem 1.5:
Every real symmetric matrix $A {}$ can be diagonalised.
#### Proof:
See Greub :3
### Corollary 1.6:
Up to projective linear change of coordinates, every projective conic is one of the following types. 
1. non-degenerate conic: ${} \{ X^{2}+Y^{2}-Z^{2}=0 \} {}$
2. the empty set: ${} \{ X^{2}+Y^{2}+Z^{2}=0 \} {}$
3. A pair of lines: ${} \{ X^{2}-Y^{2}=0 \} {}$
4. A single point: ${} \{ X^{2}+Y^{2}=0 \} {}$
5. The double line: ${} \{ X^{2}=0 \} {}$
#### Proof:
Let ${} Q(X,\, Y,\, Z) {}$ be our degree $2$ homogenous polynomial defining our conic, and let ${} A_{Q} {}$ be the associated symmetric matrix. Then we have a projective linear invertible matrix ${} M$ such that  $MA_{Q}M^{-1} {}$ is diagonal. In these coordinates, ${} Q(X,\, Y,\, Z) {}$ becomes ${} aX^{2}+bY^{2}+cZ^{2} {}$. Now either ${} a=0,\, a=-\alpha^{2},\, a=\alpha^{2} {}$. Then replace $X$ by $\alpha X$, so in these final coordinates, 
$$
Q(X,\, Y,\, Z)=\alpha X^{2}+\beta Y^{2}+\gamma Z^{2}
$$
where ${} \alpha,\, \beta,\, \gamma \in \{ -1,\, 0,\, 1 \} {}$. 