---
tags:
  - chapter
  - alggeo
date: 2025-01-24
completed: true
---
[[Directory]], [[Algebraic Geometry 1|Subject Directory]]
[[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/1. |🞀🞀]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/1. |◀]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/3. |▶]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/11. |🞂🞂]]
# 
## 
### 
We've learned about the geometry of solutions to *one* polynomial. What about systems of equations of the form
$$
\begin{align}
 f(x,\, y) & =0   \\
 g(x,\, y) & =0
 \end{align}
$$
### Definition 1.1: Projective Space (general)
Let ${} K {}$ be a field. Then
$$
\begin{align}
 \mathbb{P}_{K}^{n} & =\{ \text{lines through the origin in } K^{n+1} \}  \\
 & = \{  \text{ratios of the form }[X_{0}:X_{1}:\dots :X_{n}],\, X_{i} \in K \} \\
 & =(K^{n+1} - \{ 0 \}) /\sim \qquad (X_{0},\, X_{1},\,\dots,\,X_{n})\sim (tX_{0},\, tX_{1},\,\dots,\,tX_{n})
 \end{align}
$$

As in ${} \mathbb{R} / \mathbb{C} {}$, we have homogenous coordinates on ${} \mathbb{P}_{K}^{n} {}$, namely
$$
[X_{0}:X_{1}:\dots :X_{n}]
$$
### Proposition 1.2:
Define ${} U_{i} \subseteq \mathbb{P}_{K}^{n} {}$ to be the following:
$$
U_{i}=\{ [X_{0}:\dots :X_{n}] \mid  X_{i} \neq 0 \}
$$
1. We have a "natural" identification ${} U_{i}\to{}K^{n} {}$ given by ${} [X_{0}:\dots :X_{n} ]\mapsto (X_{0} /X_{i},\,\dots,\,\hat{X_{i}},\,\dots,\,X_{n} / X_{i}) {}$. 
2. ${} \mathbb{P}^{n}_{K}=\bigcup_{i=0}^{n} U_{i} {}$ (note this is not necessarily disjoint)
If you know about manifolds, this shows that ${} P^{n}_{\mathbb{R}}$ or ${} P^{n}_{\mathbb{C}} {}$ is a manifold, and the ${} U_{i}$ are open subsets of the manifold. 

3. on ${} U_{i}\cong K^{n} {}$ we have affine (Euclidian, cartesian, etc) coordinates
$$
x_{j}=\frac{X_{j}}{X_{i}}
$$
where ${} j\neq i$. These are the natural coordinate functions on ${} K^{n} {}$. Now if $i\neq j {}$, then 
$$
U_{j}\supseteq U_{i} \cap  U_{j} =\left\{  x_{i}=\frac{X_{i}}{X_{0}} \neq 0   \right\} \subseteq K^{n}
$$
4. We have a natural identification of ${} \mathbb{P}^{n}_{K} -\{ U_{i} \}\to{}\mathbb{P}^{n-1}_{K} {}$ given by 
$$
[X_{0}:\dots :0:\dots :X_{n}]\mapsto [X_{0}:\dots :X_{i-1}:X_{i+1}:\dots :X_{n}]
$$
#### Proof:
Exercise #todo 

Let ${} f \in K[X_{0},\,\dots,\,X_{n}] {}$. We call $f {}$ homogenous of degree $d {}$ iff ${} f(tX_{0},\,\dots,\,tX_{n})=t^{d}f(X_{0},\,\dots,\,X_{n}) {}$. 
### Lemma 1.3:
Let ${} f \in K[X_{0},\,\dots,\,X_{n}] {}$ be a homogenous polynomial. Then $f$ does not define a well-defined function 
$$
\mathbb{P}_{K}^{n} \to{}K
$$
unless $f {}$ is constant. 

However, 
$$
\{ [X_{0}:\dots :X_{n}] \mid  f(X_{0},\,\dots,\,X_{n})=0 \} \subseteq  \mathbb{P}_{K}^{n}
$$
is well defined. 
#### Proof:
If $f$ defines a well-defined function on ${} \mathbb{P}^{n}_{K}$, then it must assign the same value to ${} [X_{0}:\dots :X_{n}] {}$ and ${} [tX_{0}:\dots tX_{n}] {}$, as these represent the same point in ${} \mathbb{P}_{K}^{n}$. However, 
$$
f(X_{0},\,\dots,\,X_{n})=0 \iff f(tX_{0},\,\dots,\,tX_{n})=t^{d}f(X_{0},\,\dots,\,X_{n})=0
$$
### Proposition 1.4:
Let ${} K$ be a field, and let ${} f \in K[X_{0},\, X_{1}] {}$ be a degree $d$ homogenous polynomial. Then 
1. ${} \aleph (\{ [X_{0}:X_{1}] \in \mathbb{P}^{1}_{K} \mid  f(X_{0},\, X_{1})=0 \})\leq d {}$
2. If $K$ is algebraically closed, then (counted with multiplicity)
$$
{} \aleph (\{ [X_{0}:X_{1}] \in \mathbb{P}^{1}_{K} \mid  f(X_{0},\, X_{1})=0 \})= d {}
$$
#### Proof:
Let ${} \conj{K} {}$ be an algebraic closure of $K$. The inclusion ${} K \subseteq \conj{K} {}$ gives an inclusion ${} \mathbb{P}^{1}_{K} \subseteq \mathbb{P}^{1}_{\conj{K}} {}$ and so ${} 2 \to{}1 {}$. So we may assume $K {}$ algebraically closed. 

 We may write 
$$
f(X_{0},\, X_{1})=X_{1}^{e} g(X_{0},\, X_{1})
$$
where $g$ is homogenous of degree ${} d-e {}$ and ${} X_{1} \nmid g(X_{0},\, X_{1}) {}$. Let ${} t=X_{0} / X_{1} {}$, and recall that ${} X_{1}^{d}f(t,\, 1)=f(X_{0},\, X_{1}) {}$. We define ${} h(t)=g(t,\, 1) {}$. Now since $K$ is algebraically closed, then 
$$
h(t)=(t-\alpha_{1})^{n_{1}}\dots (t-\alpha_{r})^{n_{r}}
$$
for roots ${} \alpha_{i} \in K {}$, and ${} n_{1}+\dots+n_{r}=d-e {}$. Multiplying by ${} X_{1}^{d}$ gives
$$
f(X_{0},\, X_{1})=(X_{0}-\alpha_{1}X_{1})^{n_{1}}\dots (X_{0}-\alpha_{r}X_{r})^{n_{r}} X_{1}^{e}
$$
and so $f {}$ has zeros at ${} [\alpha_{i}:1] {}$ of multiplicity ${} n_{i}$, and zeros at ${} [1,\, 0] {}$ of multiplicity $e {}$. We conclude by observing that ${} n_{1}+\dots+n_{r}+e=d {}$. 
### Theorem 1.5: Bézout's Theorem 
Let ${} K$ be an algebraically closed field, and let 
$$
C_{i} \subseteq \mathbb{P}^{2}_{k}
$$
be a "curve" defined as ${} C_{i}=\{ f_{i}=0 \} {}$ where ${} f_{i}$ is homogenous of degree ${} d_{i}$, for ${} i=1,\, 2 {}$. Assume that $f_{1}\neq f_{2} {}$. Then the the number of intersection points of ${} C_{1} {}$ with $C_{2} {}$ is ${} d_{1} d_{2} {}$, when counted with multiplicity. 
#### Proof:
Too hard to prove in general  (:() but we move. We'll prove it in special cases. 

We say that a curve in ${} \mathbb{P}^{2}_{K}$ is a *line* if is the zero set of a degree $1 {}$ homogenous polynomial. Then
#### Theorem
Let ${} K$ be an algebraically closed field. Then $f$ is homogenous of degree $d$, and let $C$ be it's zero set in ${} \mathbb{P}^{2}_{K} {}$, and let ${} L \subseteq \mathbb{P}^{2}_{K} {}$ be a line. Then the number of intersections of $C$ and $L$ is $d {}$, counted with multiplicity. 
##### Proof:
Since ${} C \cap  L {}$ is invariant under change of coordinates, we may assume that ${} L=\{ X=0 \} {}$. Our intersection is now given by
$$
\{ [X:Y:Z] \mid  f(X,\, Y,\, Z)=X=0 \}
$$
Because $L \neq C {}$, we have that ${} X \nmid  f(X,\, Y,\, Z) {}$ (result of nullstellensatz (cheating)). In particular, if ${} g(Y,\, X)=f(0,\, Y,\, Z) {}$, then $g$ is a homogenous polynomial of degree $d$. By prop 1.4, the number of solutions to $g$ is $d$, counted with multiplicity. 
#### Theorem (Bézout's Theorem when ${} d_{1}=2 {}$ and $d_{2} {}$ is arbitrary)
to prove this, we need the following:
### Lemma 1.6: Parameterisation of Conics in ${} \mathbb{P}_{K}^{2} {}$
Let ${} K {}$ be an algebraically closed field of characteristic ${} p\neq 2 {}$. Let ${} C \subseteq \mathbb{P}^{2}_{K} {}$ be a non-degenerate conic (i.e. not two lines and not the double line). Then there exists a bijection 
$$
p: \mathbb{P}^{1}_{K}\to{}C \subseteq \mathbb{P}^{2}_{K}
$$
such that 
$$
p([S:T])=[p_{0}(S,\, T): p_{1}(S,\, T) :p_{2}(S,\, T)]
$$
where ${} \deg p_{i}=2 {}$ and the ${} p_{i} {}$ are homogenous. Now $p$ is called a parameterisation of $C$. 
#### Proof:
After a projective linear change of coordinates, we may assume that 
$$
C=\{X^{2}+Y^{2}-Z^{2}=0\}
$$
After a further change of coordinates:
$$
\begin{align}
 U & =Y-Z   \\
W & =Y+Z
 \end{align}
$$
we may assume that
$$
C=\{ X^{2}-YZ=0 \}
$$
Now let $[S:T]$ be our homogenous coordinates on ${} \mathbb{P}^{1}_{K}$. Now let
$$
p([S:T])=[ST:S^{2}:T^{2}]
$$
Note
$$
p([\alpha S:\alpha T])=[ \alpha^{2} ST:\alpha^{2} S^{2} :\alpha^{2}T^{2}]=[ST:S :T]=p([S:T])
$$
so $p$ is well defined. Now $p$ is injective, as if
$$
p([S:T])=p([U:V])
$$
then
$$
[ST:S^{2} :T^{2}]=[UV:U^{2}:V^{2}]
$$
and so ${} \frac{S^{2}}{ST}=\frac{U^{2}}{UV} {}$, so $\frac{S}{T}=\frac{U}{V} {}$. Therefore, ${} [S:T]=[U:V] {}$. 

Now if ${} f(X,\, Y,\, Z)=X^{2}-YZ {}$, then ${} f(ST,\, S,\, T)=(ST)^{2}-S^{2}T^{2}=0 {}$, and so ${} p(\mathbb{P}^{1}_{K}) \subseteq C {}$. 

Now let ${} [a:b:c] {}$ be a point on $C$. Then there exists a $\beta$ such that ${} \beta^{2}=b {}$, and $\gamma$ such that ${} \gamma^{2}=c {}$. Since ${} a^{2}=bc {}$ (since it lies in $C$) then $a=\pm \beta\gamma {}$. Then either ${} p([\beta:\gamma])=[a:b:c] {}$ or ${} p([-\beta:\gamma])=[a:b:c] {}$. Therefore, $p$ is a bijection from ${} \mathbb{P}^{1}_{K} {}$ to $C$. 

Now proof of the above case of Bézout's 
##### Proof:
Call $C_{1}=Q {}$ be our conic. If $Q$ is degenerate, then is is a union of $2$ lines, and so we may just apply the previous case twice. Therefore, we may assume that $Q {}$ is non-degenerate. Now by lemma 1.6, there exists a bijection ${} p : \mathbb{P}^{1}_{K}\to{}Q \subseteq \mathbb{P}^{2}_{K} {}$. Then the number of solutions of ${} \{ f=g=0 \} {}$ is exactly the number of solutions of ${} \{g(S,\, T)=f(p_{0}(S,\, T),\, p_{1}(S,\, T),\, p_{2}(S,\, T))=0\} \subseteq \mathbb{P}^{1}_{K}. {}$ Then $g$ has degree $2d {}$, and so by above there are $2d {}$ solutions. 