---
tags:
  - chapter
  - alggeo
date: 2025-02-07
completed: false
---
[[Directory]], [[Algebraic Geometry 1|Subject Directory]]
[[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/1. |🞀🞀]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/3. |◀]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/5. |▶]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/11. |🞂🞂]]
# 
## 
### Lemma 1.1:
Let $K$ be an algebraically closed field of characteristic $p>3 {}$, and let ${} \lambda \in K -\{ 0,\, 1 \} {}$. Let ${} \phi(t),\, \psi(t) \in K(t) {}$, and suppose that ${} \psi(t)^{2}=\phi(t)(\phi(t)-1)(\phi(t)-\lambda) {}$, then ${} \varphi(t),\, \psi(t) \in K {}$ (i.e. are constant)
#### Proof:
If ${} \phi(t) \in K {}$, then ${} \psi(t) \in K {}$. We may write
$$
\phi(t)=\frac{r(t)}{s(t)} \qquad \psi(t)=\frac{p(t)}{q(t)}
$$
where ${} r,\, s,\, p,\, q \in K[t] {}$, and we may assume that ${} r,\, s {}$ and ${} p,\, q {}$ have no common factors. Now we clear denominators in our starting equation:
$$
s(t)^{3}p(t)^{2}=q(t)^{2}r(t)(r(t)-s(t))(r(t)-\lambda s(t)) \tag{*}
$$
#todo find the notes missing

Similarly, ${} q(t)^{2} \mid  s(t)^{3} {}$. This tells us that ${} as(t)^{3}=q(t)^{2} {}$, for some ${} a \in K {}$. This gives us
$$
as(t)= \left( \frac{q(t)}{s(t)} \right) ^{2}\tag{**}
$$
This tells us that ${} s(t)$ is a square in ${} K[t]$ and ${} s(t) \mid q(t) {}$. Now substitute ${} (**) {}$ into ${} (*) {}$:
$$
p^{2}(t)=ar(t)(r(t)-s(t))(r(t)-\lambda s(t))
$$
In fact, ${} r(t),\, r(t)-s(t),\, r(t)-\lambda s(t) {}$ are also squares in ${} K[t] {}$. 

We shall now construct an infinite sequence of polynomials. Set ${} r_{0}(t)=r(t) {}$ and ${} s_{0}(t)=s(t) {}$. We proceed by way of induction.

We claim that, with the supposition that there exist ${} r_{i}(t) {}$ and ${} s_{i}(t) \in K[t] {}$ with no common factors, and ${} \lambda_{i},\, \mu_{i} \in K -\{ 0 \} {}$ with ${} \lambda_{i}\neq \mu_{i} {}$ such that 
$$
r_{i}(t),\, s_{i}(t),\, r_{i}(t)-\lambda_{i} s_{i}(t),\, r_{i}(t)-\mu_{i} s_{i}(t)
$$
are all squares in ${} K[t] {}$, then there exist ${} r_{i+1}(t) {}$ and ${} s_{i+1}(t) \in K[t] {}$ with no common factors and ${} \lambda_{i+1},\, \mu_{i+1} \in K-\{ 0 \} {}$ with ${} \lambda_{i+1}\neq \mu_{i+1} {}$ such that
$$
r_{i+1}(t),\, s_{i+1}(t),\, r_{i+1}(t)-\lambda_{i+1} s_{i+1}(t),\, r_{i+1}(t)-\mu_{i+1} s_{i+1}(t)
$$
are all squares, and ${} \deg r_{i+1}=\frac{ \deg r_{i} }{ 2 } {}$ and ${} \deg s_{i+1} = \frac{ \deg s_{i} }{ 2 } {}$. Note that since ${} r_{i},\, s_{i} {}$ are both squares they must have even degree. 
##### Proof:
We have that ${} r_{i}(t)=u(t)^{2} {}$ and ${} s_{i}(t)=v(t)^{2} {}$. Then
$$
r_{i}(t)-\lambda_{i} s_{i}(t)=(u(t)-\lambda'v(t))(u(t)+\lambda'v(t))
$$
where ${} (\lambda')^{2}=\lambda_{i} {}$, and 
$$
r_{i}(t)-\mu_{i} s_{i}(t)=(u(t)-\mu'v(t))(u(t)+\mu'v(t))
$$
where ${} (\mu')^{2}=\mu_{i} {}$. Note that ${} u(t),\, v(t) {}$ have no common factors, so
$$
u(t)-\lambda'v(t) \qquad \text{ and }\qquad u(t)+\lambda'v(t)
$$
have no common factors, and 
$$
u(t)-\mu'v(t) \qquad \text{ and }\qquad u(t)+\mu'v(t)
$$
have no common factors. In particular, all of these polynomials are squares. Therefore, take
$$
r_{i+1}(t)=u(t)-\lambda' v(t) \qquad \text{and} \qquad s_{i+1}(t)=u(t)+\lambda'v(t)
$$
and one may find ${} \lambda_{i+1},\, \mu_{i+1} \in K-\{ 0 \} {}$ such that 
$$
u(t)-\mu'v(t)=r_{i+1}(t)+\lambda_{i+1}s_{i+1}(t)\qquad \text{and}\qquad 
u(t)+\mu'v(t)=r_{i+1}(t)+\mu_{i+1}s_{i+1}(t)
$$

(follows from linear algebra, check #todo). Furthermore, ${} \deg r_{i+1}=\deg r_{i} / 2 {}$ and ${} \deg s_{i+1}=\deg  s_{i} / 2 {}$. 


Now apply the claim with ${} r_{0}(t)=r(t) {}$ and ${} s_{0}(t)=s(t) {}$ and $\lambda_{0}=\lambda {}$ and ${} \mu_{0}=1 {}$. This produces an infinite series of pairs of polynomials
$$
(r_{0},\, s_{0}),\, (r_{1},\, s_{1}),\,\dots,\,(r_{i},\, s_{i}),\,\dots
$$
with degrees
$$
\deg r_{0},\, \deg r_{0}/2,\,\dots,\,\deg r_{0} / 2^{n},\,\dots
$$
and likewise for ${} s_{i} {}$. Since these all must be integers and is infinite, then${} \deg r_{0}=\deg r=0 {}$, so ${} \phi(t) \in K {}$ and ${} \psi(t) \in K {}$.
### Theorem 1.2:
Let $K {}$ be an algebraically closed field of characteristic $p>3 {}$. Let 
$$
f(X,\, Y,\, Z)=Y^{2}Z-X(X-Z)(X-\lambda Z)
$$
with ${} \lambda \in K -\{ 0,\, 1 \} {}$. Then any polynomial ${} \mathbb{P}_{k}^{1}\to{}C=\{ f=0 \} \subseteq \mathbb{P}_{K}^{2} {}$ is constant. 
#### Proof:
Suppose that we have ${} p=[p_{1}(s,\, t):p_{2}(s,\, t):p_{3}(s,\, t)]:\mathbb{P}^{1} \to{}C {}$ with ${} p_{i}$ homogenous of the same degree. Note that
$$
f(p_{1},\, p_{2},\, p_{3})=0
$$
since the image is contained in $C$. Set ${} x=\frac{s}{t} {}$, and let ${} \phi(x)=\frac{p_{1}(s,\, t)}{p_{3}(s,t)} {}$ and ${} \psi(x)= \frac{p_{2}(s,\, t)}{p_{3}(s,\, t)}  {}$. Note that since ${} p_{i}$ are homogenous, then $\phi,\, \psi {}$ are both rational functions in $K$. Now 
$$
\begin{align}
0= \frac{f(p_{1},\, p_{2},\, p_{3})}{p_{3}^{3}}=\psi(x)^{2}-\phi(x)(\phi(x)-1)(\phi(x)-\lambda)
\end{align}
$$
Then lemma 1.1 implies that ${} \psi(x),\, \phi(x) \in K {}$, and $p {}$ is a constant map. 
# Nullstellensatz
### Motivation
Let ${} f,\, g \in K[x,\, y] {}$ such that ${} \gcd(f,\, g)=h {}$. Then we may show that ${} \{ f=0 \} \cap  \{ g=0 \} \supseteq \{ h=0 \} {}$. 

Now suppose that ${} \{ h= 0\} \subseteq \{ f=0 \} \cap  \{ g=0 \} {}$. Does this imply that ${} h \mid f {}$ and ${} h \mid g {}$?
## Commutative Algebra & Noetherian rings
All rings are commutative from now on. 
### Proposition 2.1:
Let ${} R$ be a ring. Then the following are equivalent: 
1. Every ideal is finitely generated
2. Every increasing chain of ideals stabilises
3. Every non-empty set of ideals has a maximal element w.r.t. ${} {\subseteq} {}$. 
#### Proof:
Open grillet :3

A ring satisfying any of these conditions is called *Noetherian*. 
#### Example:
$\mathbb{Z} {}$, ${} \mathbb{Z}[X_{0},\,\dots,\,X_{n}] {}$.
### Proposition 2.2:
Let $R$ be Noetherian, and let ${} I \subseteq R {}$ be an ideal, and ${} 1 \in S \subseteq R {}$ be a multiplicative subset (that is ${} s,\, s' \in S {}$, then ${} ss' \in S {}$). Then $R/I {}$ is Noetherian, and $S^{-1}R {}$ is Noetherian.
#### Proof:
Exercise #todo. Hint: follows because every ideal in $R/I {}$ (resp. $S^{-1}R {}$) is of the form ${} P /I {}$ (resp. ${} S^{-1}P {}$) for any ideal ${} P \subseteq R {}$. 
### Theorem 2.3: Hilbert basis Theorem
Let ${} R$ be Noetherian. Then $R[X]$ is Noetherian. 
#### Proof:
See Grillet. 
### Corollary 2.4:
Let $K {}$ be a field. Then any finitely generated $K$-algebra is Noetherian. Recall that $R$ is a $K$-algebra if there exists an injective ring homomorphism $\phi:K\to{}R {}$, and $R$ is a *finitely generated* $K$-algebra if there exists a surjective ring homomorphism ${} \psi :K[x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n}]\to{}R {}$. 
#### Proof:
The proof is immediate. 
## Ideals to subsets of ${} K^{n} {}$
### Definition 2.5: Vanishing Locus and Algebraic sets
Let ${} I \subseteq K[x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n}] {}$ be an ideal. Let ${} V(I) \subseteq K^{n} {}$ be the vanishing locus (or zero) locus of ${} I {}$, defined as follows:
$$
V(I)=\{ (a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{n}) \mid \forall f \in I: f(a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{n})=0 \}
$$
A subset ${} X \subseteq K^{n} {}$ is called an algebraic set if ${} X=V(I) {}$ for some ${} I \subseteq K[x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n}] {}$.
#### Remark: 
If ${} f \in K[x,\, y] {}$ in a polynomial, then
$$
V((f))=\{ f=0 \}\subseteq K^{2}
$$
#### Remark:
If ${} I=K[x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{0}] {}$, then ${} V(I)=\varnothing  {}$ (since ${} 1 \in I {}$, and $1\neq 0 {}$). 
Conversely, If ${} I=(0) {}$, then ${} V((0))=K^{n} {}$.
#### Remark:
Some sources write ${} \mathbb{A}_{K}^{n} {}$ instead of ${} K^{n}$. 
### Proposition 2.6:
Suppose that ${} K=\mathbb{R} {}$ or $K=\mathbb{C} {}$, and let $X$ be an algebraic set. Then $X$ is closed in the Euclidian topology. 
#### Proof:
Let ${} I \subseteq K[x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n}] {}$ be an ideal, and note that ${} I=(f_{1},\,\dots,\,f_{m}) {}$ for some polynomials. Consider the function ${} F:K^{n}\to{}K^{m} {}$ with 
$$
F(p)=(f_{1}(p),\,\dots,\,f_{m}(p))
$$
By definition, ${} V(I)=F^{-1}((0,\,\dots,\,0)) {}$. Since the ${} f_{i}$ are continuous, then $F$ is continuous, and ${} (0,\,\dots,\,\, 0) \in K^{m} {}$ is closed. Therefore, ${} V(I)$ is closed. 