---
tags:
  - chapter
  - alggeo
date: 2025-02-14
completed: false
---
[[Directory]], [[Algebraic Geometry 1|Subject Directory]]
[[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/1. |🞀🞀]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/4. |◀]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/6. |▶]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/11. |🞂🞂]]
#todo watch first 30 mins
#### Example
Let $K=\mathbb{R} {}$, and let ${} f(x,\, y)=x^{2}+y^{2} \in \mathbb{R}[x,\, y] {}$. Then ${} V((f))=\{(0,\, 0)\} {}$. Then ${} I(\{ (0,0) \})=\{ g \in \mathbb{R}[x,\, y] \mid  g(0,\, 0)=0 \}=(x,\, y) {}$. Then ${} (f) \subset I(V((f)))=(x,\, y) {}$. This is because $\mathbb{R} {}$ is not algebraically closed. 

If try the same example over ${} \mathbb{C}$ then you find this behaves better. 
#### Example:
Consider ${} f(x)=x^{2} \in \mathbb{R}[x] {}$. Then ${} V((f))=\{ 0 \} {}$, but ${} I(\{ 0 \})=(x) {}$.
## Prime and radical ideals
Let $R$ be a ring (commutative), and let ${} I \subseteq   R {}$ be an ideal. We say that $I {}$ is *prime* if $I\neq R {}$ whenever ${} fg \in I {}$ then ${} f \in I {}$ or ${} g \in I {}$. 

We say that $I$ is radical if whenever ${} f^{m} \in I {}$, then ${} f \in I {}$. (show that all prime ideals are radical).
### Lemma 1.1:
Let $R$ be a ring and let ${} I\subseteq R {}$ be an ideal. Then ${} \rad (I)=\sqrt{I}=\{ f \in R \mid  \exists n : f^{n} \in I \} {}$. We claim that this is an ideal, and ${} I \subseteq \rad (I) {}$.
#### Proof:
Clearly, ${} 0 \in \rad (I) {}$. Now, let ${} f,\, g \in \rad (I) {}$, and let ${} n \in \mathbb{N} {}$ such that ${} f^{n},\, g^{n} \in I {}$. Then 
$$
(f+g)^{2n}=\sum_{k=0}^{2n} \binom{2n}{k} f^{2n-k}g^{k}
$$
Now note that either ${} f^{n} \mid f^{2n-k}g^{k} {}$ or ${} g^{n} \mid  f^{2n-k}g^{k} {}$. Therefore, since $I$ is an ideal, then ${} f^{2n-k}g^{k} \in I {}$, so ${} (f+g)^{2n} \in I {}$, and ${} f+g \in \rad (I) {}$. 

Finally let ${} f \in \rad (I) {}$, and let ${} r \in R {}$, and let ${} n \in \mathbb{N} {}$ such that ${} f^{n} \in I {}$. Then ${} (rf)^{n}=r^{n}f^{n} \in I {}$, so ${} rf \in \rad (I) {}$. Therefore, ${} \rad (I) {}$ is an ideal.
#### Remark:
Note that ${} \rad (I) {}$ is radical, and ${} \rad (I) {}$ is the smallest radical ideal containing ${} I {}$.  Proof: fuck you
### Definition 1.2: Irreducible algebraic sets
Let ${} X \subseteq  K^{n} {}$ be an algebraic set. We say that $X$ is *reducible* if ${} X=X_{1} \cup  X_{2} {}$, where ${} X_{i}$ is an algebraic set and ${} X_{i} \neq X {}$. We say that $X$ is *irreducible* if it is not reducible.
### Proposition 1.3:
Let ${} X \subseteq K^{n} {}$ be an algebraic set. Then $X$ is irreducible iff $I(X)$ is prime. 
#### Proof:
Suppose that $X$ is irreducible. Then let ${} f,\, g \in K[x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n}] {}$ such that ${} fg \in I(X) {}$. Notice that ${} X=X \cap  \{ fg=0 \} {}$. Therefore, ${} (X \cap \{ f=0 \}) \cup (X \cap  \{ g=0 \}) {}$, as ${} \{ f=0 \} \cup  \{ g=0 \} {}$. Both ${} X \cap  \{f=0\} {}$ and ${} X \cap  \{ g=0 \} {}$ are algebraic sets. Therefore, by irreducibility, one of these sets, say ${} X \cap  \{ f=0 \} {}$, is equal to $X$, i.e. ${} X \subseteq \{ f=0 \} {}$, or equivalently, ${} f \in I(X) {}$. Therefore ${} I(X) {}$ is prime. 

Suppose that ${} I(X)$ is prime, and suppose that ${} X=X_{1} \cup  X_{2} {}$, where ${} X_{i}$ is an algebraic set. Observe that ${} I(X_{1}) I(X_{2}) \subseteq I(X) {}$. Suppose BWOC that ${} X_{1}\neq X$ and $X_{2}\neq X$. By prop 3.5 (find), there exists some ${} f_{i} \in I(X_{i}) {}$ and ${} f_{i} \notin I(X) {}$. We know that ${} f_{1}f_{2} \in I(X) {}$, but neither ${} f_{1},\, f_{2} \notin  I(X) {}$, contradicting the primality of $I(X)$. 
#### Examples:
Let ${} J =(xy,\, z) {}$. Then ${} V(J) {}$ is the set of points 
$$
\begin{align}
 V(J) & =\{ (x,\, y,\, z) \mid xy=z=0 \}   \\
 & =\{ (x,\, y,\, z) \mid  x=z=0 \} \cup  \{ (x,\, y,\, z) \mid y=z=0 \}
 \end{align}
$$
which is not irreducible. 

Let ${} J=(xy,\, yz) {}$. Then
$$
\begin{align}
V(J) & =\{ (x,\, y,\, z) \mid  xy=yz=0 \} \\
 & = (\{ x=0 \} \cup \{ y=0 \}) \cap (\{ y=0 \} \cup  \{ z=0 \}) \\
 & =\{ y=0 \} \cup \{ x=z=0 \}
\end{align}
$$
## Hilbert's Nullstellensatz
Let $K$ be an algebraically closed field, and let ${} J \subseteq K[x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{ n}] {}$ be an ideal. Then the following hold:
1. Any *maximal* ideal of ${} K[x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n}] {}$ is of the form ${} (x_{1}-a_{1},\, x_{2}-a_{2},\,\dots,\,x_{n}-a_{n}) {}$ for ${} a_{i} \in K {}$.
2. ${} V(J)=\varnothing  {}$ iff ${} 1 \in J {}$.
3. ${} I(V(J))=\rad (J) {}$
#### Proof:
See notes
### Corollary 1.4: Weak Nullstellensatz
Let $K$ be algebraically closed, and let ${} f_{1},\,\dots,\,f_{ r} \in K[x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n}] {}$ with no common zero, i.e.
$$
\{ f_{1}=\dots =f_{r} =0\}=\varnothing 
$$
then there exist ${} g_{1},\,\dots,\,g_{r} {}$ such that 
$$
f_{1}g_{1}+\dots+f_{r}g_{r}=1
$$
#### Proof:
By 2.  from the Nullstellensatz., then ${} 1 \in (f_{1},\,\dots,\,f_{r}) {}$, and so we use Bézout's.
### Corollary 1.5:
Let $K {}$ be algebraically closed. Then there is a one-to-one and inclusion reversing correspondence between irreducible algebraic subsets of ${} K^{n}$ and prime ideals in ${} K[x_{1},\,\dots,x_{n}\,] {}$.
### Corollary 1.6:
Let $K$ be algebraically closed, and let ${} X \subseteq K^{n} {}$ be an algebraic set. Then 
$$
I(X)=\bigcap _{\substack{I(X) \subseteq M\\M \text{ maximal}} }M
$$
#todo see if there is any relation between the Frattini subgroup.
#### Proof:
Clearly, ${} I(X) \subseteq \bigcap _{I(X) \subseteq M}M {}$. Let ${} f \in \bigcap _{I(X) \subseteq M}M {}$. By the Nullstellensatz, a maximal ideal ${} M \supseteq I(X) {}$ is of the form ${} M=(x_{1}-a_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n}-a_{n}) {}$ where ${} (a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{n}) \in X {}$. Recall that ${} V(M)=\{(a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{n})\} \subseteq V(I(X))=X {}$. ${} f \in M {}$ means that ${} f(a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{n})=0 {}$. Then ${} f \in \bigcap _{I(X) \subseteq M}M {}$ means that ${} f(p)=0 {}$ for all ${} p \in X {}$. Then ${} f \in I(X) {}$ and so ${} \bigcap _{I(X) \subseteq M}M \subseteq I(X) {}$. 
#### Example:
Let ${} (R,\, m) {}$ be a local ring. Then $R$ has a unique maximal ideal. Then ${} (0) \subset M {}$, and so 
$$
(0) \neq  \bigcap _{(0) \subseteq M} M
$$
## Quasi Proof of Nullstellensatz
#### Theorem 1.7:
Let $K$ be a field, and let $A$ be a finitely generated $K$-algebra. If $A$ is a field, then $A$ is algebraic over $K$, that is, for all ${} a \in A {}$ there exists some ${} f (t) \in K(t) {}$ such that ${} f(a)=0 {}$. In other words, $A$ is an algebraic extension of $K {}$.

