---
tags:
  - chapter
  - alggeo
date: 2025-02-28
completed: false
---
[[Directory]], [[Algebraic Geometry 1|Subject Directory]]
[[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/1. |🞀🞀]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/6. |◀]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/8. |▶]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/11. |🞂🞂]]
# Morphisms
## Functions on Algebraic sets
Let ${} X \subseteq  K^{n} {}$ be an algebraic set, and let ${} I=I(X) {}$. We define ${} K[X]=K[x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n}] / I {}$. We call this the ring of polynomial (or regular) functions on $X$. Let ${} f \in K[X] {}$. 
### Claim
We claim that ${} f {}$ defines a function ${} X \to{}K {}$,
#### Proof:
Let ${} F \in K[x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n}] {}$ such that ${} f=F \:(\mathrm{mod}\  I)  {}$, and define ${} f(a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{n})=F(a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{n}) {}$ for a point ${} \mathbf{a} = (a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{n}) \in X {}$. We must check that this is well defined.  Let ${} \tilde{F} \in K[x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n}] {}$ such that ${} f=\tilde{F} \:(\mathrm{mod}\  I)  {}$. Since ${} F-\tilde{F} \in I {}$, then ${} (F-\tilde{F})(a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{n})=0 {}$. Therefore, 
$$
\tilde{F}(a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{n})=F(a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{n})
$$
as required. 
### Remark
$K$ is an algebraic set. One should think of $f {}$ as a morphism of algebraic sets ${} f:X \to{}K {}$. 
## Polynomial mappings (or morphisms) between algebraic sets
Let ${} X \subseteq K^{n} {}$ and ${} Y \subseteq K^{m} {}$ be two algebraic sets. A polynomial map, or morphism, $f:X\to{}Y {}$ is a function of the form
$$
f(a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{n})=(F_{1}(a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{n}),\,\dots,\,F_{m}(a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{n}))
$$
where ${} (a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{n}) \in X {}$ and ${} F_{i} \in K[x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n}] {}$. 
### Remark
1) The identity map ${} 1_{X}:X\to{}X {}$ is a morphism.
2) If $f:X\to{}Y {}$ and $g:Y\to{}Z {}$ are morphisms, then ${} (g \circ  f):X\to{}Z {}$ is a morphism. 

We say that a morphism is an isomorphism if it has an inverse which is a morphism, i.e.
$$
f:X\to{}Y \Rightarrow \exists g:Y\to{}X\quad :\quad g \circ  f = f \circ  g = \id 
$$
Note that bijective morphisms are not always isomorphisms.
#### Example:
1) ${} f:K \to{}K^{3} {}$ mapping ${} t\mapsto (t,\, t^{2},\, t^{3}) {}$. This is a morphism, but not an isomorphism. We showed that $f(K)=X {}$ is an algebraic set, and that ${} f:K\to{}X {}$ is an isomorphism, with inverse ${} g:X\to{}K {}$ given by ${} (x,\, y,\, z)\mapsto x {}$. 
2) isomorphisms are always bijective (exercise)
3) ${} C=\{ x^{2}-y^{3}=0 \} \subseteq \mathbb{C}^{3} {}$. Let ${} r(t):\mathbb{C} \to{}C {}$ mapping ${} t \mapsto (t^{3},\, t^{2}) {}$. This is bijective (easy) but not an isomorphism (not so easy).
## Morphisms of rings
Let $f:X\to{}Y {}$ be a morphism of algebraic sets. We define a $K$-algebra morphism $f^{*}:K[Y]\to{}K[X] {}$ as follows: 

Let ${} g \in K[Y] {}$. Then $g$ gives a polynomial function $g:Y\to{}K {}$. Then ${} g \circ  f:X\to{}K {}$ is again polynomial function, and ${} g \circ  f \in K[X] {}$. We define
$$
f^{*}(g)=g \circ f
$$
#todo exercise: verify this is a $K$-algebra morphism, e.g. ${} f^{*}(g+h)=(g+h)\circ f=g \circ  f + h \circ  f = f^{*}(g)+f^{*}(h) {}$. 

More concretely, ${} X \subseteq K^{n} {}$, ${} Y \subseteq K^{m} {}$, and $f:X\to{}Y {}$ is given by ${} f(x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n})=(F_{1}(x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n}),\,\dots,\,F_{m}(x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n})) {}$, and ${} g \in K[Y] {}$ is represented by a polynomial ${} g(y_{1},\,\dots,\,y_{m}) {}$, then ${} f^{*}(g)=g(F_{1}(x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n}),\,\dots,\,F_{m}(x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n})) {}$.

In fact, every $K$-algebra morphism $\Phi:K[Y]\to{}K[X] {}$ arises this way. Suppose there exists some $f:X\to{}Y {}$ such that $f^{*}=\Phi {}$. To prove this, let ${} K[Y]=K[y_{1},\,\dots,\,y_{m}] / I(Y) {}$. We define ${} f_{i}=\Phi(\conj{y_{i}}) {}$, where ${} \conj{y_{i}}=y_{i} \:(\mathrm{mod}\   I(Y))  {}$.  Now ${} f_{i} \in K[X] {}$ gives a function ${} f_{i}:X \to{}K {}$. Thus, 
$$
f= (f_{1},\,\dots,\,f_{m})
$$
gives ${} f:X\to{}K^{m} {}$. Now we need to show that ${} f(X) \subseteq Y {}$. To show this, we need to show that if ${} g \in I(Y) {}$, then ${} g(f_{1},\,\dots,\,f_{m})=0 {}$. This holds, since
$$
\begin{align}
g(f_{1},\,\dots,\,f_{m}) & =g(\Phi(\bar{y_{1}}),\,\dots,\,\Phi(\bar{y_{m}})) \\
 & =\Phi(g(\bar{y_{1}},\,\dots,\,\bar{y_{m}}))
\end{align}
$$
now since ${} g(\bar{y_{1}},\,\dots,\,\bar{y_{m}})=0$, then $\Phi(g(\bar{y_{1}},\,\dots,\,\bar{y_{m}}))=0 {}$. 

Furthermore, we must show that ${} f^{*}=\Phi {}$. It suffices to show that $f^{*} {}$ and $\Phi {}$ act the same on the generators, that is, 
$$
f^{*}(\bar{y_{i}})=\Phi(\bar{y_{i}})
$$
But by definition, ${} f^{*}(\bar{y_{i}})=f_{i}=\Phi(\bar{y_{i}}) {}$. 
### Theorem 1.1:
Let $X \subseteq K^{n} {}$, ${} Y \subseteq  K^{m} {}$ be algebraic sets. Then there is a bijection between
$$
\{ \text{morphisms of algebraic sets } X\to{}Y  \} \leftrightarrow \{ K\text{-algebra morphisms } K[Y] \to{}K[X] \}
$$
mapping ${} f\to{}f^{*} {}$. 
### Corollary 1.2:
${} X$ and $Y {}$ are isomorphic as algebraic sets iff ${} K[X]$ and $K[Y]$ are isomorphic as $K$-algebras. 
#### Example:
Let $X=\mathbb{C} {}$ and ${} Y=\{ x^{2}-y^{3}=0 \} \subseteq \mathbb{C} ^{2} {}$. Now ${} K[\mathbb{C}]=\mathbb{C}[t] {}$, and ${} K[Y]=\mathbb{C}[x,\, y] / (x^{2}-y^{3}) {}$.  These are *not* isomorphic as $\mathbb{C}$-algebras. 
## Zariski Topology on algebraic sets
If ${} X \subseteq K^{n} {}$ is an algebraic set, then we say that ${} Z \subseteq X {}$ is Zariski closed if ${} Z \subseteq K^{n} {}$ is an algebraic set.
### Proposition 1.3:
Let ${} X\subseteq K^{n} {}$, ${} Y \subseteq K^{m} {}$ be algebraic sets, and let $f:X\to{}Y {}$ be a morphism. Then $f$ is continuous under the Zariski topology. 
#### Proof:
It suffices to show that the preimage of an algebraic set is an algebraic set. (i.e. ${} f^{-1}(A) {}$ is closed for closed $A$). If ${} Z \subseteq Y {}$ is an algebraic subset defined by ${} I(Z) \subseteq K[Y] {}$, then $f^{-1}(Z) {}$ is defined by ${} (f^{*}(I(Z)))$. In particular, let ${} (a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{m}) \in Z {}$, and let ${} g \in I(Z) {}$ if ${} (b_{1},\,\dots,\,b_{n}) \in f^{-1}((a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{n})) {}$, then ${} (f^{*}g)(b_{1},\,\dots,\,b_{n})=g(f(b_{1},\,\dots,\,b_{n}))=g(a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{n})=0 {}$. Therefore, $f {}$ is continuous. 
#### Recall
The nullstellensatz tells us there is a one-to-one correspondence between points ${} x \in X {}$ and maximal ideals containing $I(X)$. 

Recall as well that if ${} \varphi:S\to{}R {}$ is a ring homomorphism, and ${} M \subseteq R {}$ is maximal, then $\varphi ^{-1}(M)$ is maximal. 
### Lemma 1.4:
Let ${} X \subseteq K^{n} {}$ and ${} Y \subseteq K^{m} {}$ be algebraic sets, and let $f:X\to{}Y {}$ be a morphism, and let ${} \varphi=f^{*}:K[Y]\to{}K[X] {}$
1) Let ${} x \in X {}$ correspond to the maximal ideal ${} M_{x} \subseteq K[X] {}$. Then ${} f(x)$ is the point corresponding to ${} \varphi ^{-1}(M_{x})$.
2) Let ${} Z \subseteq X {}$ be an algebraic subset corresponding to $I(Z)$. Then the closure under the Zariski topology of $f(Z)$ is defined by the ideal $(\varphi ^{-1}(I(Z)))$.
#### Proof:
1) 
${} g \in M_{f(x)} \subseteq K[Y] {}$ iff ${} f^{*}g \in M_{x} {}$. This is since ${} g \in M_{f(x)} {}$ iff ${} g(f(x))=0 {}$ iff ${} f^{*}g(x)=0 {}$ iff ${} f^{*}g \in M_{x} {}$. 
2) 
Let $J$ be the ideal defining the closure of $f(Z)$. $V(J)$ being the smallest algebraic set containing ${} f(Z) {}$ is equivalent to the condition that $J$ is the largest ideal 
$$
J \subseteq  \bigcap _{I(Z) \subseteq M} \varphi ^{-1}(M)=\varphi ^{-1}\left(  \bigcap _{I(Z) \subseteq M} M \right)
$$
(note that ${} f(x) \in V(J) {}$ when ${} x \in Z {}$ is equivalent to the condition that ${} J \subseteq \varphi ^{-1}(M_{x}) {}$. )
Now the nullstellensatz tells us that ${} \bigcap_{I(Z) \subseteq M}M=I(Z) {}$. This is because if ${} f \in \bigcap _{I(Z) \subseteq M_{x},\, x \in Z}M_{x} {}$, then since ${} f \in M_{x} \iff f(x)=0 {}$, then by definition since ${} f(x)=0 {}$ for all ${} x \in Z$, then ${} f \in I(Z) {}$. 
### Proposition 1.5:
Let $X,\, Y {}$ be algebraic sets as before, and let $f:X\to{}Y {}$ be a morphism, and let $f^{*}:K[Y]\to{}K[X] {}$ be the associated ring homomorphism. Now:
1)  ${} f^{*} {}$ is surjective iff ${} f(X) \subseteq Y {}$ is an algebraic set and ${} X\to{}f(X) {}$ is an isomorphism.
2) $f^{*}$ is injective iff there exists a Zariski open subset ${} U \subseteq Y {}$ such that ${} f:{} f^{-1}(U)\to{}U {}$ is surjective. 
#### Proof:
1) 
Let ${} J \in K[Y] {}$ be the kernel of $f^{*}$. Let ${} \tilde{J} {}$ be the preimage of $J$ underneath the natural quotient ${} K[y_{1},\,\dots,\,y_{m}]\to{}K[Y] {}$. The ideal ${} (\tilde{J},\, I(Y)) \subseteq K[y_{1},\,\dots,\,y_{m}] {}$ defines an algebraic subset ${} Z \subseteq Y {}$. By construction, ${} K[Z]\cong K[Y] /J \cong  K[X] {}$. Therefore, $K[X]\cong K[Z]$, and $X\cong Z$. 
2) 
It suffices to show that the Zariski closure of $f(X)$ is all of $Y$. By Lemma 1.4, the Zariski closure of $f(X)$ is defined by 
$$
\left( \varphi ^{-1}\left( \bigcap _{M \subseteq K[X]}M \right) \right)
$$
where ${} \varphi=f^{*} {}$. The nullstellensatz tells us that the above is ${} (0)$, and so ${} (\varphi ^{-1}(0))=(0) {}$. Finally, ${} V((0))=Y {}$. 