---
tags:
  - chapter
  - alggeo
date: 2025-03-07
completed: false
---
[[Directory]], [[Algebraic Geometry 1|Subject Directory]]
[[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/1. |🞀🞀]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/7. |◀]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/9. |▶]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/11. |🞂🞂]]
# 
## Morphisms of projective algebraic sets
### Definition 1.1: Morphisms from Affine algebraic sets to projective algebraic sets
Let ${} X \subseteq K^{n} {}$ be an affine algebraic set, and let ${} Y \in \mathbb{P}^{m}_{K} {}$ be a projective algebraic set. A morphism $f:X\to{}Y {}$ is a function of the form
$$
f(x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n})=[F_{0}(x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n}):\dots :F_{m}(x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n})]
$$
where the ${} F_i \in K[X] {}$, such that
$$
\{ F_{0} =F_{1}=\dots =F_{m}=0\}\cap X=\varnothing 
$$
Note however that there is no homogeneity required.
#### Example:
Let
$$
f(t)=[t^{2}:t^{3}:1]
$$
is a morphism from ${} K\to{}\mathbb{P}_{K}^{3} {}$. However, 
$$
f(t)=[t^{3}:t^{4}:t]
$$
is not a well defined morphism when ${} t=0 {}$. 


Recall that, given a projective algebraic set ${} V \subseteq \mathbb{P}^{n}_{K} {}$, 
$$
V_{i}=V \cap  \{  X_{i} \neq 0 \} \subseteq \{ X_{i} \neq 0 \}\cong K^{n}
$$

Note that ${} V_{i} \subseteq K^{n} {}$ is an affine algebraic set. Therefore, if ${} V \subseteq \mathbb{P}^{n}_{K},\, Y \subseteq \mathbb{P}^{m}_{K} {}$ are projective algebraic sets, then a function $f:V\to{}Y {}$ is a morphism iff ${} f_{|V_{i}}:V_{i} \to{}Y {}$ is a morphism from an affine algebraic set to a projective algebraic set.
### Proposition 1.2:
Let ${} X \subseteq \mathbb{P}^{n}_{K} {}$ be a projective algebraic set and let ${} F_{0},\,\dots,\,F_{m} \in K[X_{0},\,\dots,\,X_{n}] {}$ be degree $d$ homogeneous polynomials such that ${} \{ F_{0}=\dots =F_{m}=0 \}\cap X=\varnothing  {}$. Then 
$$
F=[F_{0}:\dots :F_{m}]:X\to{}\mathbb{P}^{n}_{K}
$$
is a morphism
#### Proof:
We leave it as an exercise to show that $f$ is well defined. To show that $F$ is a morphism, we need to look at $F$ on the set ${} \{ X_{0}\neq 0 \} \cap  X {}$. The other sets can be handled in a similar way. 

Recall that we have affine coordinates ${} x_{i}=\frac{X_{i}}{X_{0}} {}$ on ${} \{ X_{0} \neq 0\} {}$. We define ${} f_{k}(x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n})=F_{k}\left( 1,\, \frac{X_{1}}{X_{0}},\,\dots,\, \frac{X_{n}}{X_{0}} \right) {}$. On the set ${} \{ X_{0} \neq 0 \} {}$, we have that
$$
\begin{align}
 [f_{0}(x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n}):\dots :f_{m}(x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n})] & =[X_{0}^{-d} F_{0}(X_{0},\,\dots,\,X_{n}):\dots :X_{0}^{-d}F_{m}(X_{0},\,\dots,\,X_{0}n)]   \\
 & =[ F_{0}(X_{0},\,\dots,\,X_{n}):\dots :F_{m}(X_{0},\,\dots,\,X_{0}n)] 
 \end{align}
$$
since ${} X_{0}^{-d}\neq 0 {}$. Note that ${} \{ f_{0}=\dots =f_{m} =0\}\cap  X=\varnothing  {}$, and so ${} [f_{0}:\dots :f_{m}]:X \cap  \{ X_{0} \neq 0 \}\to{}\mathbb{P}^{m}_{K} {}$ gives a well defined morphism, which is equal to the restriction of $F$ to ${} X_{0}\neq 0 {}$. Therefore, $F$ is a morphism.
#### Example:
Consider the conic ${} C=\{ XY-Z^{2}=0 \} \subseteq \mathbb{P}^{2} {}$. Recall that we show that the conics are *parameterised*, that is, there exists a bijective morphism ${} f:\mathbb{P}^{1}\to{}C {}$ with ${} f([S:T])\to{}[S^{2}:T^{2}:ST] {}$. Define ${} g:C\to{}\mathbb{P}^{1} {}$. Let ${} C_{0}=\{ [0:1:0] \} {}$ and ${} C_{1}=C-\{ [1:0:0] \} {}$. On $C_{0}$, we define ${} g([a:b:c])=[a:c] {}$, and on $C_{1}$ we define ${} g([a:b:c])=[c:b] {}$. We claim that this is well defined. 

Let ${} [a:b:c] \in C_{0} \cap  C_{1} {}$. Note that ${} [a:b:c] {}$ are all non-zero, due to the properties of the equation. Now
$$
[a:c]=[ca:c^{2}]=[ca:ab]=[c:b]
$$
This tells us that $g$ is well defined. Note that ${} g {}$ is also a morphism, and ${} g \circ f:\mathbb{P}^{1} \to{}\mathbb{P}^{1} {}$ is the identity. Therefore, $f$ is an isomorphism. 
#### Example: Segre embedding
Fix $n>0 {}$ and $d>0 {}$, and consider the set of all monomials of degree equal to $d$ in $n+1 {}$ variables, i.e., 
$$
X_{0}^{a_{0}}\cdot{\dots}\cdot X_{n}^{a_{n}}\qquad  a_{0}+\dots+a_{n}=d
$$
there are ${} \binom{n+d}{d}  {}$ such monomials. We get a morphism
$$
s:\mathbb{P}^{n}\to{}\mathbb{P}^{N}\qquad N=\binom{n+d}{d} -1
$$
mapping
$$
[X_{0}:\dots :X_{n}]\mapsto [X_{0}^{a_{0}}\cdot{\dots}\cdot X_{n}^{a_{n}}]_{a_{0}+\dots+a_{n}=d}
$$
for example, ${} n=1 {}$, ${} d=3 {}$, we have
$$
s([X:Y])=[X^{3}:X^{2}Y:XY^{2}:Y^{3}]
$$
