---
tags:
  - chapter
  - alggeo
date: 2025-03-14
completed: false
---
[[Directory]], [[Algebraic Geometry 1|Subject Directory]]
[[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/1. |🞀🞀]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/8. |◀]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/10. |▶]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Algebraic Geometry/Lectures/11. |🞂🞂]]
# 
## 
### 
${} \frac{f}{g} {}$ is not well defined as a function since
1) We have a "pole" along the locus ${} \{ g=0 \} {}$
2) We have an "indeterminacy" along the locus ${} \{ f=g=0 \} {}$

Note that $1 {}$ is not that big of an issue: we may re-imagine our rational function as a morphism* to ${} \mathbb{P}^{1}$, namely ${} F=[f:g]:X\to{}\mathbb{P}^{1} {}$. The point at infinity, that is ${} [1:0] {}$, has preimage ${} F^{-1}([1:0])=\{ g=0 \} {}$. Away from the set ${} \{ g=0 \} {}$, ${} F {}$ may be written as 
$$
F=\left[ \frac{f}{g}:1 \right]:X - \{ g=0 \}\to{}\mathbb{P}^{1} - \{ [1:0] \}\cong K
$$
and so we may recover ${} f /g {}$. 

However, issue $2$ is more serious, and cannot be avoided. However, we will explain later why the "indeterminacy locus" is usually "small". An intuitive explanation is the following: suppose ${} X=\mathbb{P}^{n} {}$, and ${} f,\, g {}$ have a common factor, say, ${} f=hf_{0} {}$, and ${} g=hg_{0} {}$. Note that ${} [f:g] {}$ and ${} [f_{0}:g_{0}] {}$ define "equivalent" rational maps. If $f_{0}$ and $g_{0}$ are coprime, then the indeterminacy locus ${} \{ f_{0}=g_{0}=0 \} {}$ contains no hypersurfaces, thanks to the nullstellensatz. 
#### Example:
The indeterminacy locus of a rational map ${} \mathbb{P}^{2}\to{}\mathbb{P}^{1} {}$ is a finite set of points. 

More generally, the key fact we needed was that ${} K[X_{0},\,\dots,\,X_{n}] {}$ is a UFD. 
### Theorem 1.2:
Let $V$ be an affine algebraic set, and suppose that ${} K(V)=K[x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{n}] / I(V) {}$ is a UFD. Then any rational morphism ${} f:V\to{}\mathbb{P}^{1} {}$ is equivalent to a rational morphism whose indeterminacy locus does not contain any hypersurfaces.

Therefore, we are interested in when $K[V]$ is a UFD (i.e. what does this mean geometrically)

### Theorem 1.3: 
Let $X$ be a smooth algebraic set. Then $K[X]$ is a UFD. 

So smoothness implies unique factorisation. The converse is not true: Consider
$$
\mathbb{C}[x,\, y,\, z,\, w] / (x^{2}+y^{2}+z^{2}+w^{3})
$$
which is a UFD, but ${} \{x^{2}+y^{2}+z^{2}+w^{3}=0\} {}$ fails to be smooth at ${} \mathbf{0}=(0,\, 0,\, 0,\, 0) {}$. 
The study of singularities is a big field. A major theorem is called "resolution of singularities by blow ups"
#### Example:
Let $C$ be a smooth algebraic curve, e.g. of the form ${} \{ f=0 \} \subseteq \mathbb{P} ^{2} {}$ or $K^{2} {}$. Then hypersurfaces in $C$ are points, so if a rational map defined on $C$ has no hypersurfaces in it's indeterminacy locus, then it's indeterminacy locus is empty (that is, it's defined everywhere). 
### Theorem 1.4:
There is a one-to-one correspondence between morphisms ${} F:C\to{}\mathbb{P}^{1} {}$ and elements in $K[C]$. 

Recall ${} \{ XY-Z^{2}=0 \} {}$. We can show that ${} X / Z {}$ gives an element in ${} K[C] {}$, and by the theorem, this gives a morphism ${} F:C\to{}\mathbb{P}^{1} {}$, which is exactly the morphism we defined earlier. 
## Rational morphisms in general
In general, we are not free to ignore the indeterminacy locus. 
#### Example:
${} f:K^{2}\to{}\mathbb{P}^{1} {}$ given by ${} f(x,\, y)=x / y {}$ always fails to be defined at ${} (0,\, 0) {}$. Let ${} X \subseteq K^{n} {}$ and ${} Y \subseteq K^{m} {}$ be algebraic sets. By definition, a rational morphism ${} F:X\dashrightarrow{} Y {}$ is a function defined on a dense Zariski open subset ${} U \subseteq X {}$ such that there exist ${} f_{1},\,\dots,\,f_{m} \in K(X) {}$ such that ${} F_{|U}=(f_{1},\,\dots,\,f_{m}):U \to{}Y {}$. We say that rational morphisms ${} F_{1}  {}$ and $F_{2} {}$ are equivalent if there exists a dense Zariski open subset ${} V {}$. such that ${} F_{1}|_{V}=F_{2} |_{V} {}$. 

If ${} X \subseteq \mathbb{P}^{n} {}$ and ${} Y \subseteq \mathbb{P}^{m}  {}$ are projective algebraic sets, we say that ${} F:X\dashrightarrow{}Y {}$ is a rational morphism if there exist dense Zariski open subset ${} U \subseteq X {}$ and ${} f_{0},\,\dots,\,f_{m} \in K[X_{0},\,\dots,\,X_m] {}$ homogeneous of degree $d$ such that ${} F|_{U}=[f_{0}:\dots :f_{m}]:U \to{}Y {}$. Analogously, we define equivalence of rational morphisms. A rational isomorphism, $F$, is a rational morphism with a rational inverse, i.e., $G$ such that ${} F \circ G {}$ and ${} G \circ  F {}$ are equivalent to the identity. 

#### Remark:
In the definition of a rational morphism of projective algebraic sets, we could have allowed ${} F_{i}=g_{i} / h_{i} {}$, where ${} g_{i} {}$ and $h_{ i} {}$ are homogeneous of degree ${} a_{i}+d,\, b_{i} {}$ respectively. Note that, however, ${} [f_{0} :\dots:f_{m}] {}$ is equivalent to ${} [hf_{0}:\dots :hf_{m}] {}$ when ${} h=h_{0}\cdot{\dots}\cdot h_{m} {}$ and so in fact the definitions are equivalent. 
#### Example:
${} \mathbb{P}^{n} \dashrightarrow \mathbb{P}^{k} {}$, where ${} k \leq n {}$ mapping ${} [X_{0}:\dots :X_{n}]\to{}[X_{0}:\dots :X_{k}]  {}$ is a rational map. This is not well defined at ${} \{ [0:\dots :0:X_{k+1}:\dots :X_{n}] \} {}$. 
#### Example:
${} g:K^{2}\to{}K^{2} {}$, mapping ${} (x,\, y)\mapsto (x,\, xy) {}$. Note that ${} g {}$ is is not an isomorphism, as $g$ is not bijective; ${} g(0,\, k)=(0,\, 0) {}$. However, it is a rational isomorphism. Define ${} h:K^{2}\dashrightarrow K^{2} {}$ mapping ${} (x,\, y)\mapsto (x,\,  y /x) {}$. This isn't well defined when ${} x=0 {}$. However, ${} \{ x=0 \} {}$ is closed, so ${} K^{2} - \{ x=0 \} {}$ is open and dense. Note that ${} h \circ  g \equiv g \circ  h \equiv  (x,\, y)\mapsto (x,\, y) {}$. Therefore, $g$ is the rational inverse to $h {}$. 
#### Example: Birational automorphisms
Given an algebraic set $X$, we define $\aut(X) {}$ to be the group of isomorphisms $f:X\to{}X {}$, with a group law given by function composition. Now ${} \operatorname{Bir}(X) {}$ is the group of rational isomorphisms ${} f:X\dashrightarrow X {}$. Note, clearly, that ${} \aut(X) \subseteq \operatorname{Bir}(X) {}$ is a subgroup.
### Theorem 1.5
${} \aut(\mathbb{P}^{n}_{K})=\mathrm{PGL}(n+1,\, K) {}$. 

Recall that ${} \mathrm{PGL}(n+1,\, K)=\mathrm{GL}(n+1,\, K) / \langle K^{\times } \cdot I_{n+1} \rangle  {}$
#### Proof: (sketch)
We saw on a previous problem sheet that  we have an injective group homomorphism ${} \mathrm{PGL}(n+1,\, K)\to{}\aut(\mathbb{P}_{K}^{n}) {}$, that is, if ${} A=(a_{ij})\mapsto ([X_{0}: \dots  : X_{n}] \mapsto [a_{ 00}X_{0} +\dots+a_{ 0n}X_{n}:\dots :a_{ n0} X_{0}+\dots +a_{nn} X_{n}]) {}$. 
It remains to show that this is surjective. We have a rational map ${} q:K^{n+1} \dashrightarrow \mathbb{P}^{n}_{K} {}$ mapping ${} (X_{0},\,\dots,\,X_{n})\mapsto [X_{0}: \dots  : X_{n}] {}$. We therefore get a rational morphism ${} f \circ  g : K^{n+1} \dashrightarrow \mathbb{P}^{n}_{K} {}$ which can be represented by ${} F_{0},\,\dots,\,F_{n} \in K[X_{0},\,\dots,\,X_{n}] {}$ which are homogeneous of degree ${} d$, that is, ${} [F_{0}: \dots  :F_{n}] {}$ is equivalent to ${} f \circ  g {}$.

If we can show that ${} d=1 {}$, then ${} F_{i}$ are linear, and so ${} [F_{0}:\dots :F_{n}] {}$ comes from an element in ${} \mathrm{GL}(n+1,\, K) {}$ and we are done. 

Perform that same construction with ${} g= f^{-1} {}$, giving us polynomials ${} G_{0},\,\dots,\,G_{n} {}$, and 
$$
(G_{0},\,\dots,\,G_{n}) \circ  (F_{0},\,\dots,\,F_{n}):K^{n+1} \to{} K^{n+1}
$$
Let ${} (H_{0},\,\dots,\,H_{n})=(G_{0},\,\dots,\,G_{n}) \circ  (F_{0},\,\dots,\,F_{n}) {}$. We know that ${} (H_{0},\,\dots,\,H_{n}) {}$ descends to the identity morphism on ${} \mathbb{P}^{n}_{K} {}$. Since ${} [H_{0}:\dots :H_{n}] {}$ is equivalent to the identity on ${} \mathbb{P}_{K}^{n} {}$, and so
$$
[H_{0}:\dots :H_{n}]=[X_{0}:\dots :X_{n}]
$$
and so 
$$
\frac{H_{i}}{H_{j}} = \frac{X_{i}}{X_{j}}\text{ or }X_{j}H_{i}=X_{i}H_{j}
$$
so ${} X_{j} \mid H_{j} {}$, that is, ${} H_{j}=u_{j}X_{j} {}$. Now ${} \frac{u_{i}}{u_{j}} \cdot  \frac{X_{i}}{X_{j}}=\frac{X_{i}}{X_{j}} {}$, and so ${} u_{i}=u_{j} {}$. 

Without loss of generality, we may assume that ${} H_{i} {}$ have no common factors (small cheat, possible to justify but tedious) and so ${} u_{i}=u_{j}=u {}$ is a unit. In particular, ${} 1=\deg H_{i} {}$. On the other hand, ${} \deg H_{i}=(\deg F_{i})(\deg G_{i}) {}$. Then ${} \deg F_{i}=\deg G_{i}=1 {}$.
## Cremona groups
The Cremona involution is a rational map ${} \tau:\mathbb{P} ^{2} \dashrightarrow \mathbb{P}^{2} {}$ mapping
$$
[X:Y:Z]\mapsto \left[ \frac{1}{X}: \frac{1}{Y} :\frac{1}{Z}\right]
$$
This is not defined at ${} [1:0:0],\, [0:1:0],\, [0:0:1] {}$. Clearly, ${} \tau \circ \tau {}$ is equivalent to the identity. Therefore, 
$$
\aut(\mathbb{P}^{2}) \subset \operatorname{Bir}(\mathbb{P}^{2})=\text{Cremona group}
$$
The Cremona group is generated by ${} \aut(\mathbb{P}^{2}) {}$ and $\tau {}$. 

Question: is the Cremona group simple? This was answered in 2010 in the negative. 

The key step in the proof is to show that the Cremona group acts by isometries on some infinite dimensional hyperbolic space. From this, they show that for most elements ${} g \in \operatorname{Bir}(\mathbb{P}^{2}) {}$, the cyclic group ${} \langle g \rangle  \leq \operatorname{Bir}(\mathbb{P}^{2}) {}$. In particular, it has uncountably many normal subgroups.