---
tags:
  - linear_algebra1
  - chapter
date: 2023-10-27
---
[[Directory]], [[Linear Algebra and Geometry 1|Subject Directory]]
# Dimension
## 
### Proposition 1.1
A collection of vectors ${} \mathbf{v}_{1},\,\dots,\,\mathbf{v}_{n}\in V {}$ is a basic of $V {}$ if and only if it is linearly independent and spans $V {}$
#### Proof: 
#todo 
#### Example:
Let ${} S=\{ (x,\, y,\, z)\in \mathbb{R}^{3} \mid x+2y=z\} {}$. Find a basis for $S$.
##### Solution:
Take ${} \mathbf{v}=(x,\, y,\, z)\in S {}$. Then ${} x+2y=z {}$. So
$$
\mathbf{v}=\begin{pmatrix} x \\ y \\ z \end{pmatrix} =\begin{pmatrix} x \\ y \\ x+2y \end{pmatrix}=x \begin{pmatrix} 1 \\ 0 \\ 1 \end{pmatrix} +y \begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ 1 \\ 2 \end{pmatrix}
$$
Therefore, ${} (1,\, 0,\, 1) {}$ and ${} (0,\, 1,\, 2) {}$ span $S {}$. Since they are also linearly independent, they form a basis for ${} S {}$. 
#### Consequence:
Removing things from linearly independent sets keeps them linearly independent sets, although it can stop them from spanning
So any finite set that spans, contains a basis.
## Dimension
### Theorem 1.2: Dimension Theorem
Let $V {}$ be a (finite dimensional) vector space. Every basis of ${} V$ has the same number of elements. In fact, if $V$ has a basis of $n$ elements, then
1. Any linearly independent set cannot have more than $n$ vectors
2. Any spanning set cannot have less than $n {}$ vectors
#### Proof:
In [[16. Dimension Theorem and Principle of Linearity#Proposition]]
### Definition 1.3: Dimension
The *dimension* of ${} V$, denoted ${} \dim V {}$, is the number of elements in a basis of $V$. We set ${} \dim \{ \mathbf{0} \}=0 {}$ and ${} \dim V=\infty {}$ if it has no finite basis
#### Examples:
1. ${} \dim \mathbb{F}^{n}=n {}$
2. $\dim \mathbb{P}_{n}=n+1 {}$
### Proposition 1.4: Extension of Linear Independance
Let ${} \mathbf{v}_{1},\,\dots,\,\mathbf{v}_{m} {}$ be linearly independent vectors in a finite dimensional space ${} V {}$. If they are not a basis, then there exist ${} \mathbf{v}_{m+1},\,\dots,\,\mathbf{v}_{n} {}$ such that ${} \{ \mathbf{v}_{1},\,\dots,\,\mathbf{v}_{m},\, \mathbf{v}_{m+1},\,\dots,\,\mathbf{v}_{n} \} {}$ are linearly independent.
#### Proof:
Let ${} \dim V=n {}$. Then $m<n {}$. Take ${} \mathbf{v}_{m+1}\in V,\, \mathbf{v}_{m+1}\notin \span\{\mathbf{v}_{1},\,\dots,\,\mathbf{v}_{m}\} {}$. Then ${} \mathbf{v}_{1},\,\dots,\,\mathbf{v}_{m},\, \mathbf{v}_{m+1}$ are still linearly independent. 

Repeat this process until we have $n$ vectors. This must span, by the dimension theorem. Therefore, it is a basis
#### Key point:
Any linearly independent set can be completed to a basis