---
tags:
  - linear_algebra1
  - chapter
date: 2023-11-24
---
[[Directory]], [[Linear Algebra and Geometry 1|Subject Directory]]
# Analysing Pivots
### Definition 1.1
A linear system is consistent if it has a solution. Otherwise, it is inconsistent
### Proposition 1.2: 
Let ${} A: \mathbb{F}^{n}\to{}\mathbb{F}^{m} {}$ be a linear map.
1. ${} A\mathbf{x}=\mathbf{b} {}$ is consistent for all ${} \mathbf{b}\in \mathbb{F}^{m} {}$ iff the echelon form of $A {}$ has a pivot in every row
2. $A\mathbf{x}=\mathbf{b} {}$ has a unique solution, if it exists, iff the echelon form of ${} A {}$ has a pivot in every column.
#### Proof:
#todo this was proved in the skill session.
### Proposition 1.3 : Pivots, Linear Independence, Span, and Basis
Let ${} \mathbf{v}_{1},\, \mathbf{v}_{2},\,\dots,\,\mathbf{v}_{m} \in \mathbb{F}^{n} {}$. Let $A {}$ be the matrix
$$
A=\begin{pmatrix}
\uparrow & \uparrow &  & \uparrow \\
\mathbf{v}_{1} & \mathbf{v}_{2} & \dots & \mathbf{v}_{m} \\
\downarrow & \downarrow &  & \downarrow
\end{pmatrix}
$$
Let ${} E$ be an invertible matrix such that $EA {}$ is in echelon form. Then the following hold:
1. ${} \mathbf{v}_{1},\,\dots,\,\mathbf{v}_{m} {}$ are linearly independent iff ${} EA {}$ has pivot in every column
2. ${} \mathbf{v}_{1},\,\dots,\, \mathbf{v}_{m} {}$ span $\mathbb{F}^{n}$ iff ${} EA {}$ has a pivot in every column
3. ${} \mathbf{v}_{1},\,\dots,\,\mathbf{v}_{m} {}$ are a basis iff ${} EA {}$ has a pivot in every row and column
#### Consequence:
If ${} m<n$, ${} \mathbf{v}_{1},\, \mathbf{v}_{2},\,\dots,\,\mathbf{v}_{m} {}$ cannot span ${} \mathbb{F}^{n} {}$
If ${} n<m$, ${} \mathbf{v}_{1},\, \mathbf{v}_{2},\,\dots,\,\mathbf{v}_{m} {}$ cannot be linear independent
This is exactly the dimension theorem
#### Proof: 
1. 
${} \mathbf{v}_{1},\, \mathbf{v}_{2},\,\dots,\,\mathbf{v}_{m} {}$ are linearly independent iff
$$
A\mathbf{x}=x_{1}\mathbf{v}_{1}+x_{2}\mathbf{v}_{2}+\dots+x_{m}\mathbf{v}_{m}=\mathbf{0}
$$has a *unique* solution ${} \mathbf{x}=0 {}$. Note that ${} \mathbf{x}=\mathbf{0} {}$ is always a solution, we only must show that it is unique. This happens precisely when there are no free variables, i.e. $EA$ has a pivot in every column.
2. 
${} \mathbf{v}_{1},\, \mathbf{v}_{2},\,\dots,\,\mathbf{v}_{m} {}$ span $\mathbb{F}^{n}$ iff for every $\mathbf{b} \in \mathbb{F}^{n}$, 
$$
A\mathbf{x}=x_{1}\mathbf{v}_{1}+x_{2}\mathbf{v}_{2}+\dots+x_{m}\mathbf{v}_{m}=\mathbf{b}
$$
has a solution. This happens precisely when $EA$ has a pivot in every row.
3. 
Combine 1. and 2. This completes the proof

# Principle of Linearity
Let $V$, $W$ be vector spaces, and $A:V\to{}W {}$ linear
## 
### Definition 2.1: Homogeneity
The linear equation ${} A\mathbf{x}=\mathbf{b} {}$ is *homogenous* if ${} \mathbf{b}=\mathbf{0} {}$ and *inhomogeneous* otherwise

Let ${} \mathbf{x}_{0} {}$ be a solution of ${} A\mathbf{x}=\mathbf{b} {}$, and let ${} \mathbf{x}_{h} {}$ a solution of ${} A\mathbf{x}=\mathbf{0} {}$. Now observe that
$$
A(\mathbf{x}_{0}+\mathbf{x}_{h})=A\mathbf{x}_{0}+A\mathbf{x}_{h}=\mathbf{b}+\mathbf{0}=\mathbf{b}
$$that is, ${} \mathbf{x}_{0}+\mathbf{x}_{h} {}$ is also a solution of ${} A\mathbf{x}=\mathbf{b} {}$.
Let $\mathbf{x}_{1} {}$ be another solution of ${} A\mathbf{x}=\mathbf{b} {}$. Write
$$
\mathbf{x}_{1}=\mathbf{x}_{0}+(\mathbf{x}_{1}-\mathbf{x}_{0})
$$
Check that
$$
A(\mathbf{x}_{1}-\mathbf{x}_{0})=A\mathbf{x}_{1}-A\mathbf{x}_{0}=\mathbf{b}-\mathbf{b}=\mathbf{0}
$$
So ${} \mathbf{x}_{1}-\mathbf{x}_{0}$ is a solution to the homogenous equation. 
### Theorem 2.2
Let $\mathbf{x}_{0} {}$ satisfy ${} A\mathbf{x}_{0}=\mathbf{b} {}$. Let $H$ be the set of solutions of ${} A\mathbf{x}_{0}=\mathbf{0} {}$. Then the set of solutions to ${} A\mathbf{x}=\mathbf{b} {}$ is exactly 
$$
\{ \mathbf{x}_{0}+\mathbf{x}_{h}\mid \mathbf{x}_{h} \in H \}
$$
Informally, 
The general solution of ${} A\mathbf{x}=\mathbf{b} {}$ is the sum of a particular solution of ${} A\mathbf{x}=\mathbf{b} {}$ and a general solution of $A\mathbf{x}=\mathbf{0}$
