---
tags:
  - exercises
  - grillet_abstract_alg
date:
count: 18
---
[[Directory]], [[Grillet Abstract Algebra]]
[[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/2.1. Direct products Exercises.md|🞀🞀]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/2.9. Solvable Groups Exercises.md|◀]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/2.11. Semidirect Products Exercises.md|▶]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/2.12. Group Extensions Exercises.md|🞂🞂]]
1. skip
2.  
Let ${} \alpha:G\to{}G {}$ be an automorphism. This induces an automorphism ${} \bar{\alpha}:G /Z_{k}\to{}G /Z_{k} {}$ by ${} \bar{\alpha}(xZ_{k})=\alpha(x) Z_{k} {}$. Now if ${} X=xZ_{k} \in Z(G / Z_{k})=Z_{k+1} / Z_{k} {}$, and ${} Y=yZ_{k} \in  G/Z_{k} {}$, then 
$$
\begin{align}
 \conj{\alpha}(X)Y & =  \conj{\alpha}(X)\conj{\alpha}(\conj{\alpha} ^{-1}(Y))  \\
 & =\conj{\alpha}(X \conj{\alpha} ^{-1}(Y))  \\
 & =\conj{\alpha}(\conj{\alpha} ^{-1}(Y)X) \\
 & =Y \conj{\alpha}(X)
 \end{align}
$$
So ${} \conj{\alpha}(X) \in  Z_{k+1} / Z_{k} {}$. Therefore, if ${} x \in Z_{k+1} {}$, then ${} \alpha(x)Z_{k} \in Z_{k+1} / Z_{k} {}$, so ${} \alpha(x)Z_{k}=yZ_{k} {}$ for some ${} y \in Z_{k+1} {}$, and ${} \alpha(x)y^{-1} \in Z_{k} {}$. Therefore, ${} \alpha(x)=yz {}$, for some ${} z \in Z_{k} {}$, so ${} \alpha(x) \in Z_{k+1} {}$. 
3. Completely incorrect. 
4. skip
5. skip
6. skip
7. 
Let ${} H\leq G$ with ${} G^{r}=1 {}$. First note that ${} H^{0}\leq G^{0} {}$. Now if ${} H^{k}\leq G^{k} {}$, then if ${} c=xyx^{-1}y^{-1} {}$ with ${} x \in H^{k} {}$ and ${} y \in H {}$, we have that ${} x \in G^{k} {}$ and ${} y \in G {}$, so ${} c \in G^{k+1} {}$. Therefore, the generators of ${} H^{k+1} {}$ are contained in ${} G^{k+1} {}$, and ${} H^{k+1}\leq G^{k+1} {}$, and so ${} H^{r}=1 {}$, and $H$ is nilpotent.
8. 
Let $N\trianglelefteq G$ with ${} G^{r}=1 {}$. First, we see that ${} ( G /N )^{1}\leq G /N {}$. We proceed by induction. Now if ${} ( G /N )^{k} \leq G^{k} /N {}$, then 
$$
c \in (G /N)^{k+1}\Rightarrow c=XYX^{-1}Y^{-1},\quad X \in G / N,\, Y \in ( G/N )^{k}
$$
Therefore, ${} X=xN {}$ for some ${} x \in G {}$ and ${} Y=yN {}$ for some ${} y \in G^{k} {}$. Then ${} xyx^{-1}y^{-1} \in G^{k+1} {}$, so ${} XYX^{-1}Y^{-1}=xyx^{-1}y^{-1}N \in G^{k+1} / N {}$. Therefore, ${} (G /N)^{k}\leq G^{k} /N {}$. Now since ${} G^{r}=1 {}$, then ${} ( G /N )^{r}=1 {}$, and ${} G /N {}$ is nilpotent.
9. 
Suppose that ${} N \leq Z(G) {}$ and $G /N$ are nilpotent. Then we have normal central series ${} A_{i}\;(0\leq i\leq r) {}$ and ${} \conj{B_{i}}\;(r\leq i\leq s) {}$ for ${} N {}$ and ${} G /N {}$ respectively. Then ${} \conj{B_{i}} {}$ induces a normal central series terminating at $N {}$, where ${} \conj{B_{i}}=B_{i} /N \mapsto B_{i} {}$. Now
$$
C_{i}=\begin{cases}
A_{i} & \text{if } 0\leq i\leq r \\
B_{i} & \text{if }r\leq i\leq s
\end{cases}
$$
is a normal central series for $G$. (this proof isn't quite right)