---
tags:
  - exercises
  - grillet_abstract_alg
date:
count: 13
---
[[Directory]], [[Grillet Abstract Algebra]]
[[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/2.1. Direct products Exercises.md|🞀🞀]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/2.4. Symmetric Groups Exercises.md|◀]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/2.6. Small Groups Exercises.md|▶]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/2.12. Group Extensions Exercises.md|🞂🞂]]
1. 
If ${} |G|=pk {}$ for some prime ${} p$ and some $k$, then
$$
G=G_{1}\oplus G_{2} \oplus \dots \oplus G_{n}
$$
and so ${} |G| {}$ is the product of ${} |G_{i}| {}$. Therefore, we have some $i$ such that ${} |G_{i}|=p^{m} {}$, where ${} G_{i} {}$ is cyclic. Therefore, we have a subgroup of ${} G_{i}$ of order $p {}$
2. 
First, suppose that ${} |G|=p^{k} {}$ for some prime $p$. Then ${} G=G_{1} \oplus  \dots \oplus  G_{m} {}$, where ${} p\mid |G_{i}| {}$. Now if ${} d \mid |G| {}$, if ${} m=1 {}$, then $G$ is cyclic, and so has a subgroup of order $d$. Otherwise, ${} d/|G_{1}| {}$ divides ${} G_{2} \oplus  \dots \oplus G_{m} {}$, and so contains a subgroup ${} H {}$ of order ${} d /|G_{1}| {}$ by induction. Now ${} H \oplus G_{1} {}$ has order $d {}$

Now suppose ${} |G|=p_{1}^{k_{1}}\dots p_{n}^{k_{n}} {}$. Then ${} G=G_{1} \oplus  \dots \oplus G_{m} {}$. Now set ${} H_{p_{i}} {}$ to be the product of all ${} G_{i} {}$ such that ${} p_{i}$ divides their order. If ${} d \mid |G| {}$, then
$$
d=p_{1}^{\ell_{1}}\dots p_{n}^{\ell_{n}}
$$
and ${} H_{p_{i}} {}$ has a subgroup ${} K_{p_{i}} {}$ of order ${} p_{i}^{\ell_{i}} {}$. Now ${} K=K_{p_{1}} \oplus  \dots \oplus K_{p_{n}} {}$ has order $d {}$
3. 
Suppose that $K\geq H$ with $H\trianglelefteq K$. Now, for all ${} k \in K {}$, ${} kHk^{-1}=H {}$, so ${} k \in N_{G}(H) {}$. Therefore, ${} K \leq N_{G}(H) {}$.
4. skip
5. 
If $G$ has order less than or equal to $11 {}$, then $|G| {}$ has at most 2 prime divisors, and either has 2 prime divisors of power 1, or 1 prime divisor. See that
$$
\begin{align}
1 & =1 \\
2 & =2 \\
3 & =3 \\
4 & =2\cdot 2 \\
5 & =5 \\
6 & =2 \cdot 3 \\
7 & =7 \\
8 & =2\cdot 2\cdot 2 \\
9 & =3\cdot 3 \\
10 & =2\cdot 5 \\
11 & =11
\end{align}
$$
Case $1$: ${} |G|=p^{k} {}$. Here, by Sylow's theorem, if ${} p^{n}\mid p^{k} {}$, then we have a subgroup of order $p$.
Case 2: ${} |G|=p_{1} p_{2} {}$. Now we have subgroups of order $p_{1}$ and subgroups of order $p_{2}$. This is all possible non-trivial divisors of $|G|$, so it is proved. 
6. skip
7. skip
8. 
Since the only divisor of $18 {}$ which is congruent to $1$ mod $3$ is $1$, then $G$ has exactly 1 Sylow $3$-subgroup. Therefore, that subgroup is normal. 
9. 
Since the only divisor of $30 {}$ which is congruent to $1$ mod $5$ is $1 {}$ or ${} 6 {}$, the either it has exactly $1$ Sylow 5-subgroup, which is normal, or it has $6$. Since ${} 25 \nmid{30} {}$, then the Sylow 5-subgroups are cyclic. Therefore, the subgroups must be disjoint aside from $1$, and we have ${} 6\cdot 5=30 {}$ elements of of order $5$. This is impossible, as $1$ has order $0$.
10. 
The only divisor of $56 {}$ which is congruent to $1$ mod $7$ is $1$ or $8 {}$. By a similar argument to the above, we end up with too many elements of order ${} 5$, so we have $1$ Sylow $7$-subgroup, so it is normal. 
11. 
The divisors of $33 {}$ are ${} 1,\, 3,\, 11,\, 33 {}$. Since the only divisor that is congruent to ${} 1$ mod $3 {}$ is $1 {}$, and the only divisor that is congruent to $1$ mod $11 {}$ is $1$, then ${} C_{3} \trianglelefteq G {}$ and ${} C_{11} \trianglelefteq G {}$. Therefore, ${} G \cong C_{3} \times  C_{11}\cong C_{33} {}$
12. skip
13. skip
14. 
Let $G$ be a group, and let $p$ a prime such that ${} p^{k+1} \mid |G| {}$. Let $H {}$ be a subgroup of order ${} p^{k} {}$, and let $S$ be a Sylow $p$-subgroup. Now ${} H \leq S {}$, and normal in the normaliser ${} N=N_{S}(H) {}$. Now ${} p \mid |N / H| {}$, since $N \neq H {}$, as it is not Sylow, and ${} |N| \mid |S|=p^{n} {}$. Therefore, we have a subgroup ${} \conj{K} {} {}$ of ${} N /H {}$ of order $p$, which induces a subgroup $K$ of $N$ such that ${} |K|=p^{k+1} {}$, and $H\leq K {}$. In fact, since the index of ${} H$ in $K$ is $p$, then $H\trianglelefteq K$.
