---
tags:
  - exercises
  - grillet_abstract_alg
date:
count: 15
---
[[Directory]], [[Grillet Abstract Algebra]]
[[2.6. Small Groups Exercises.md|Last]] ;; [[2.8. The General Linear Group Exercises.md|Next]]
[[Abstract Algebra - P. A. Grillet.pdf#page=87|Exercise Sheet]]
1. 
We have that
$$
G \rhd\langle s,\, r^{2} \rangle \rhd \langle s \rangle \rhd {1}
$$
2. skip
3. skip
4. skip
5. skip
6. skip
7. 
If $G$ has a composition series, then we have ${} G_{i}\;(0\leq i\leq r) {}$ with ${} G_{0}=1 {}$ and ${} G_{r}=G {}$ with ${} G_{i} /G_{i-1} {}$ simple. Now ${} 1\trianglelefteq N\trianglelefteq G {}$ is a normal series of $G$, and so these 2 series have equivalent refinements. But since ${} G_{i}$ is a composition series, then the refinement of $N$ has factors consisting entirely of either simple groups, or trivial ones. By removing all subgroups resulting in trivial factors, we reach a composition series of $G$ containing $N {}$. Call that composition series ${} N_{i} \;(0\leq i\leq s) {}$

Therefore, ${} N$ has a composition series. Furthermore, if ${} N_{i}\geq N {}$ for some ${} i\geq k {}$then ${} N_{i}\trianglerighteq N {}$, and so ${} N_{i} /N = {} \conj{N_{i}} (0 \leq i \leq k) {}$ is a normal series of ${} G / N {}$, and it's factors
$$
\conj{N_{i}} / \conj{N_{i-1}}=(N_{i} / N) / (N_{i-1} / N)\cong N_{i} / N_{i-1}
$$
are simple. Therefore, $G/N$ has a composition series.
8. skip
9. skip
10. skip
11. skip
12. 
Suppose that an abelian group $A {}$ has a composition series. Then all of it's factors are abelian. Since these factors are simple, then they must have no subgroups. Suppose one of these factors is infinite, say, $S {}$. Then ${} a \in S {}$ must generate the entire group. Therefore, $S$ is cyclic, and so ${} S \cong \mathbb{Z} {}$. But $\mathbb{Z}$ has subgroups, so cannot be simple. Therefore, all the factors of $A$ are finite. Since the composition series is of finite length, then $A$ must be finite.

Now suppose that $A$ is a finite abelian group. Then since it is finite, is has a composition series
13. skip the rest