---
tags:
  - exercises
  - grillet_abstract_alg
date:
count: 17
---
[[Directory]], [[Grillet Abstract Algebra]]
[[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/2.1. Direct products Exercises.md|🞀🞀]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/2.8. The General Linear Group Exercises.md|◀]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/2.10. Nilpotent Groups Exercises.md|▶]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/2.12. Group Extensions Exercises.md|🞂🞂]]
1. skip
2. skip
3. 
The factors of ${} D_{n} {}$ are ${} C_{n} {}$ and $C_{2}$, which are both abelian. Therefore, ${} D_{n}$ is solvable. 
4. 
Since every group of order less than ${} 60 {}$ may only have abelian composition factors, then they are solvable. 
5. 
Let $\eta {}$ be an endomorphism of $G$. Now let ${} G'=\langle \{ xyx^{-1}y^{-1} \mid x,\, y \in G \} \rangle  {}$. Now if ${} c=xyx^{-1}y^{-1} {}$, then
$$
\eta c=\eta (x) \eta (y) \eta (x)^{-1} \eta(y)^{-1} \in  G'
$$
so all the generators of $G' {}$ are invariant under ${} \eta {}$. 
6. 
We proceed by induction. Let ${} c=xyx^{-1}y^{-1} {}$, with ${} x,\, y \in G^{(k)} {}$. Now ${} \eta(x),\, \eta(y) \in G^{(k)} {}$ by hypothesis
$$
\eta c=\eta (x) \eta (y) \eta (x)^{-1} \eta(y)^{-1} \in  G^{(k+1)}
$$
and so all the generators of ${} G^{(k+1)} {}$ are invariant under ${} \eta {}$
7. 
Let $A {}$ be an abelian group, and let ${} \varphi:G \to{}A {}$ a homomorphism. Let ${} x,\, y \in G {}$. Then 
$$
\varphi(xyx^{-1}y^{-1})=\varphi(x)\varphi(y)(\varphi(y)\varphi(x))^{-1}=\varphi(x)\varphi(y)(\varphi(x)\varphi(y))^{-1}=1
$$
so ${} xyx^{-1}y^{-1} \in  \ker  \varphi {}$. Therefore, the generators of $G' {}$ are contained in ${} \ker \varphi {}$, so $\varphi$ factors uniquely through ${} G /G' {}$.

Conversely, if $H {}$ is a normal subgroup such that ${} G /H {}$ is abelian, and that for all homomorphisms ${} \varphi:G\to{}A {}$ with $A {}$ abelian, then ${} \varphi = \psi \circ  \pi {}$ for some unique ${} \psi {}$, then ${} G / G' {}$ is abelian with a canonical homomorphism ${} \tau {}$. Now ${} \tau = \psi \circ  \pi {}$ for some unique $\psi {}$, and ${} \pi =\chi \circ  \tau {}$ for some unique $\chi {}$. Therefore, 
$$
\begin{align}
\pi=\chi \circ  \psi \circ  \pi
\end{align}
$$
and so since $\pi$ is surjective, then ${} \chi \circ  \psi= \iota {}$, and $\chi$ is injective. Likewise, 
$$
\tau=\psi \circ  \chi \circ  \tau
$$
and so ${} \psi \circ  \chi = \iota {}$ and $\chi$ is bijective, and $\psi  {}$ is it's inverse. Therefore, ${} G / H \cong  G / G' {}$. Furthermore, we see that ${} G' \subseteq  H {}$, so ${} G'=H {}$. 
8. 
Let $G {}$ have a composition series ${} G_{i} {}$. Suppose ${} G {}$ is also solvable, with a normal series ${} H_{i} {}$ with abelian factors. They must have equivalent refinements, and the factors in the refinement of ${} H_{i}$ must be abelian, since they are factors of the original factors, but also must be either simple or trivial. By removing all trivial factors, we obtain a composition series all of whose factors are abelian. 
9. 
Let $G$ be a solvable group, and let $H$ be a subgroup. We have that ${} G^{(k)}=1 {}$ for some $k {}$. Now if ${} x=H' {}$, then ${} x=c_{1}\dots c_{n} {}$ for some ${} c_{i}=x_{i} y_{i} x_{i} ^{-1} y_{i} ^{-1} {}$ and ${} x_{i},\, y_{i} \in H {}$, so we only have to worry about commutators. Now ${} xyx^{-1}y^{-1} \in H' \Rightarrow  xyx^{-1}y^{-1} \in G' {}$, so ${} H' \subseteq  G' {}$

We proceed by induction. If ${} c=xyx^{-1}y^{-1} \in H^{(n+1)} {}$, then ${} c=xyx^{-1}y^{-1} {}$ for some ${} x,\, y \in H^{(n)} \subseteq G^{(n)} {}$ by hypothesis, therefore, ${} c \in G^{(n+1)} {}$. Therefore, for all ${} i {}$, ${} H^{(i)} \subseteq G^{(i)} {}$. Therefore, ${} H^{(k)}=1 {}$, and so $H$ is solvable.
10. 
Suppose $G$ is solvable, and $N\trianglelefteq G {}$. Now there exists a composition series of $G$ containing $N$ as a term, and all of it's factors are abelian. This induces a composition series of ${} G /N {}$, whose factors correspond to factors of ${} G {}$. Therefore, they are abelian, and ${} G /N {}$ is solvable.
11. 
Suppose that $N\trianglelefteq G {}$ and ${} G /N {}$ are solvable. Now we have 2 series, ${} A_{i} {}$ of $N$ with abelian factors, and ${} \conj{B_{i}} {}$ of ${} G /N {}$ with abelian factors. ${} \conj{B_{i}} {}$ induces a series of $G$ terminating at $N$ with abelian factors consisting of ${} B_{i} {}$. Now the stitching together like so
$$
1 =A_{0} \trianglelefteq A_{1} \trianglelefteq \dots \trianglelefteq A_{r}=N=B_{0} \trianglelefteq B_{1} \trianglelefteq \dots \trianglelefteq B_{s}=G
$$
we obtain a normal series of $G$ with abelian factors
12. skip
13. skip