---
tags:
  - exercises
  - grillet_abstract_alg
date:
count: 30
---
[[Directory]], [[Grillet Abstract Algebra]]
[[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/3.1. Rings Exercises.md|🞀🞀]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/3.9. Rational Fractions Exercises.md|◀]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/3.11. Noetherian Rings Exercises.md|▶]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/3.12. Gröbner Bases Exercises.md|🞂🞂]]
1. 
let ${} R {}$ be a UFD, let $P {}$ be a set of distinct representative irreducible elements such that any irreducible element has a representative in $P {}$, and let $S$ be a set in $R$. Let $M$ be the set of common divisors of $S$, and let ${} Q \subseteq P {}$ be the set of elements of $P {}$ that appear in the factorisation of any ${} m \in M {}$. Now $Q$ is finite, as otherwise, each element of $S$ must be the product of an infinite number of elements of $P$, which is impossible.

Furthermore, for each $p \in Q {}$, let ${} a^{p}_{m} {}$ be the order of $p$ in the factorisation of $m$. Suppose that there does not exist some maximum for some $p$. If ${} s \in S {}$, then ${} s=p^{k}t {}$ for some unique maximal ${} k {}$, and element ${} t \in R {}$. However, there would exist some $m$ such that ${} a_{m}^{p} {}$ is greater than $k$, and so $m {}$ is not a common multiple, which is a contradiction. Therefore, there exists some unique ${} a_{p}=\max_{m \in M}(a^{p}_{m}) {}$. Now set 
$$
d=\prod _{p \in Q} p^{a_{p}}
$$
This is clearly an element of $M$, as every element of $Q$ divides every element of $S$ at least ${} a_{p}$ times. Furthermore, every element of $M$ divides $d$, by construction. Therefore, $d {}$ is a GCD of $S$.
2. skip (proceed by induction simply)
3. 
Yes. Let $R$ be a UFD, and let ${} S \subseteq R {}$ be a set of elements. Suppose that $S$ has a non-zero common multiple, $m {}$. Then ${} m=up_{1}\dots p_{n} {}$ for some set of irreducible elements ${} p_{i} {}$, and any divisor of $m$ must be the multiple of some unit and any subsequence of the ${} p_{i} {}$. Therefore, up to multiplication by a unit, there are finitely many possible divisors of $m$. Therefore, there must be one which has no divisors, as otherwise there would be an infinite descending sequence of divisors of $m {}$.
4. 
Let ${} R=\mathbb{R}[x,\, y] {}$. Then ${} \gcd(x,\, y)=1 {}$. However, suppose that ${} ax+by=1 {}$. Then ${} ax=1-by {}$, and ${} ax \in \mathbb{R}[y] {}$. Since ${} x \neq y {}$, then this is impossible. 
5. 
Suppose that ${} \gcd(a,\, b)=\gcd(a,\, c)=1 {}$. Then ${} a=up_{1}^{a_{1}}\dots p^{a_{n}}_{n} {}$, ${} b=v p_{1}^{b_{1}}\dots p_{n}^{b_{n}} {}$, and ${} c=wp_{1}^{c_{1}}\dots p_{n}^{c_n} {}$ for some choice of distinct irreducible elements ${} p_{i}$ and units ${} u,\, v,\, w {}$. Then ${} \max(a_{ i},\, b_{ i})=0 {}$ and ${} \max(a_{ i},\, c_{ i})=0 {}$ for all $i$. Therefore, we have
$$
bc=uvp_{1}^{b_{1}+c_{1}}\dots p_{n}^{b_{ n}+c_{ n}}
$$
and so
$$
\max(a_{i},\, b_{i}+c_{i})\leq \max(a_{i},\, b_{i})+\max(a_{i},\, c_{i})=0
$$
and ${} \gcd(a,\, bc)=1 {}$
6. skip
7. 
Let $R$ be a UFD, and let ${} p \in R {}$. Suppose that ${} p$ is prime. Then, if ${} p \mid ab {}$, then either ${} p \mid a {}$ or ${} p \mid b_{ }. {}$ Therefore, if ${} p=ab {}$, then ${} p \mid a {}$ or ${} p \mid  b$. WLOG suppose that $p \mid a {}$. Then ${} pk=a {}$, and so ${} pkb=p {}$. Therefore, ${} kb=1 {}$ and $b$ is a unit, and ${} p=au {}$ for some unit $u$.

Conversely, suppose that $p$ is irreducible. Then suppose that ${} p \mid ab {}$. Now 
$$
ab=up^{k} p_{1}^{k_{1}}\dots p_{n}^{k_{n}}
$$
as $p$ is irreducible. Suppose that ${} p \nmid a {}$. Then ${} p^{k} \mid b {}$, and ${} p \mid b {}$, so $p$ is prime. 
8. skip
9. 
Let $R$ be a domain, and let $\mathfrak{a}$ be an ideal of $R$. Let ${} \pi:R\to{}R /\mathfrak{a} {}$ be the projection. Let ${} f \in R[X] {}$ be monic such that ${} \prescript{\pi}{}f {}$ is irreducible in ${} (R /\mathfrak{a})[X] {}$. Let $\psi:R[X]\to{}{} (R /\mathfrak{a})[X] {} {}$ map ${} f \mapsto \prescript{\pi}{}f {}$. Let ${} f,\, g \in R[X] {}$. Then 
$$
\prescript{\pi}{}(f+g)=\sum_{n\geq 0}\pi(a_{n}+b_{n})X^{n}=\sum_{n\geq 0} \pi(a_{n})X^{n}+\sum _{n\geq 0}\pi(b_{n})X^{n}=\prescript{\pi}{}f+\prescript{\pi}{}g
$$
and
$$
\begin{align}
 \prescript{\pi}{}(fg) & =\sum _{n\geq 0}\pi\left(  \sum _{i+j=n}a_{i}b_{j} \right) X^{n}  \\
 & = \sum _{n\geq 0} \sum _{i+j=n} \pi(a_{i})\pi(b_{j}) X^{n} \\
 & =\left( \sum _{n\geq 0} \pi(a_{n})X^{n} \right)\left( \sum _{\mathcal{n}\geq 0} \pi(b_{n})X^{n} \right) \\
 & =\prescript{\pi}{}f\;\prescript{\pi}{}g
 \end{align}
$$
So therefore ${} \prescript{\pi}{}({-}) {}$ is a homomorphism. Finally, let ${} f \in (R /\mathfrak{a})[X] {}$. Then ${} f=\sum _{n\geq 0}a_{n}X^{n} {}$, and for each ${} a_{n} {}$ there exists some ${} b_{n} {}$ such that ${} \pi(b_{n})=a_{n} {}$. Therefore, there exists some polynomial in ${} R[X] {}$, ${} g=\sum _{n\geq 0}b_{n}X^{n} {}$ with ${} \prescript{\pi}{}g=f {}$. Therefore, ${} \prescript{\pi}{}({-}) {}$ is surjective.

Now suppose that ${} f$ is reducible in ${} R[X] {}$. Then ${} f=gh, {}$ for ${} g,\, h \in R {}$ which are not units. Therefore, ${} \prescript{\pi}{}f=\prescript{\pi}{}g \;\prescript{\pi}{}h {}$. Suppose that $\prescript{\pi}{}g {}$ is a unit in ${} (R /\mathfrak{a})[X] {}$. Then $\prescript{\pi}{}g {}$ is a unit of ${} R /\mathfrak{a} {}$ and so all ${} g_{i} \in \mathfrak{a} {}$, and ${} g_{0} \in 1+\mathfrak{a} {}$. Now if ${} a=\deg f {}$, and ${} b=\deg g {}$, then ${} g_{b} \mid f_{a}=1 {}$, and so ${} g_{b}=u {}$ a unit. Therefore, ${} g_b=g_{0}=u {}$, and $g$ is a unit. Therefore, $\prescript{\pi}{}f {}$ is reducible in ${} (R /\mathfrak{a})[X] {}$.
10. 
We have that ${} X^{3}-10 {}$ is primitive. Take ${} 5 \in \mathbb{Q} {}$. Then ${} 5 \mid 10 {}$, ${} 5 \mid 0 {}$, and ${} 5 \nmid 1 {}$, and ${} 25 \nmid 10 {}$. Therefore, ${} X^{3}-10 {}$ is irreducible. 
11. 
We have that ${} X^{3}-3X^{2}-6X+3 {}$ is primitive. Take ${} 3 \in \mathbb{Q} {}$. This clearly satisfies Eisenstein's condition.
12. 
We have that the polynomial is monic. Now let ${} \pi:\mathbb{Z} \to{}\mathbb{Z} /2\mathbb{Z} {}$. Then ${} \prescript{\pi}{}f=X^{3}+X^{2}+1 {}$ is irreducible, and so $f$ is irreducible. 
13. 
We have that $f$ is monic. Now let ${} \pi:\mathbb{Z} \to{}\mathbb{Z} / 5 \mathbb{Z}  {}$. Then ${} \prescript{\pi}{}f=X^{3}+2X+4 {}$ is primitive and ${} 2 \in \mathbb{Z} /5\mathbb{Z} {}$ satisfies Eisenstein's condition. Therefore, $f$ is irreducible. 
14. 
Let $R$ be a domain, and let ${} f(X)=a_{0}+a_{1}X+\dots+a_{n}X^{n} \in R[X] {}$ be primitive. Suppose there exists some prime ideal ${} \mathfrak{p} \subseteq R {}$ such that ${} a_{i} \in \mathfrak{p} {}$ for all $i<n {}$, ${} a_{n} \notin \mathfrak{p} {}$, and $a_{0}$ is not the product of two elements of $\mathfrak{p}$. 

Suppose that ${} f=gh {}$, with ${} g=b_{0}+\dots+b_{r}X^{r} {}$ and ${} h=c_{0}+\dots+c_{s}X^{s} {}$. Then 
$$
a_{k}=\sum _{i+j=k} b_{i}c_{j}
$$
and in particular, ${} a_{0}=b_{0}c_{0} {}$. Therefore, not both ${} b_{0},\, c_{0} \in \mathfrak{p} {}$. However, ${} a_{0} \in \mathfrak{p} {}$, so since $\mathfrak{p}$ is a prime ideal one of ${} b_{0},\, c_{0} \in \mathfrak{p} {}$, say, ${} b_{0} \in \mathfrak{p} {}$. Also, ${} b_{r} \notin \mathfrak{p} {}$, since ${} a_{n} \notin \mathfrak{p} {}$. Therefore, there exists some least $k\leq r {}$ such that ${} b_{k} \notin \mathfrak{p} {}$, and for all $i<k {}$, then ${} b_{i} \in \mathfrak{p} {}$. Therefore, every term of ${} \sum _{i+j=k}b_{i}c_{j} {}$ is an element of $\mathfrak{p}$ except for ${} b_{k}c_{0} {}$. Now if ${} a_{k} \in \mathfrak{p} {}$, then since $\mathfrak{p}$ is closed under addition, then
$$
b_{k}c_{0}=a_{k}-\sum _{\substack{i+j=k\\j>0} }b_{i}c_{j} \in \mathfrak{p}
$$
and so ${} a_{k} \notin \mathfrak{p} {}$. Therefore, ${} k=n {}$, and so ${} r=n {}$. Therefore, $h$ is a constant. Since $f$ is primitive, then $h$ is a unit, and $f$ is irreducible.