---
tags:
  - exercises
  - grillet_abstract_alg
date:
count: 22
---
[[Directory]], [[Grillet Abstract Algebra]]
[[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/3.1. Rings Exercises.md|🞀🞀]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/3.1. Rings Exercises.md|◀]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/3.3. Homomorphisms Exercises.md|▶]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/3.12. Gröbner Bases Exercises.md|🞂🞂]]
1. 
Let $R$ be a ring, and let ${} \mathcal{A}=(A_{i})_{i \in I} {}$ be a family of subrings of ${} R {}$. Then ${} \bigcap \mathcal{A} {}$ is an abelian subgroup of $R$ containing $1$. Now if ${} x,\, y,\, z \in \bigcap \mathcal{A} {}$, then ${} x,\, y,\, z \in A_{i} {}$ for all ${} i \in I {}$, so ${} xy \in A_{i} {}$ and ${} (xy)z=x(yz) {}$ in ${} A_{i} {}$, so ${} xy \in \bigcap \mathcal{A} {}$ and multiplication is commutative.
2. 
Let ${} \mathcal{A}=(A_{i})_{i=I} {}$ be a directed family of subrings of a ring ${} R {}$. Now ${} \bigcup \mathcal{A} {}$ is an abelian subgroup of ${} R {}$ containing $1$. Now if ${} x,\, y,\, z \in \bigcup \mathcal{A} {}$, then there exists some ${} i,\, j,\, k \in I {}$ such that ${} x \in A_{i},\, y \in A_{j},\, z \in A_{k} {}$. Therefore, there is some ${} \ell \in I {}$ such that ${} A_{i},\, A_{j},\, A_{k} \subseteq A_{\ell} {}$. Therefore, ${} xy \in A_{\ell} {}$, and ${} (xy)z=x(yz) {}$, and ${} \bigcup \mathcal{A} {}$ is a subring
3. skip
4. skip
5. skip
6. skip
7. 
Let $R$ be a commutative ring. Now let $N {}$ be the set of all nilpotent elements. First note that if ${} x,\, y \in N {}$, then we have ${} a,\, b {}$ such that ${} x^{a}=0=y^{b} {}$. Now 
$$
\begin{align}
 (x+y)^{a+b} & =\sum_{i=0}^{a+b} \binom{a+b}{i} x^{i} y^{a+b-i}  \\
 & = \sum_{i=0}^{a} \binom{a+b}{i} x^{i}y^{a+b-i}+\sum_{i=a+1}^{a+b} \binom{a+b}{i} x^{i}y^{a+b-i} \\
 & =0
 \end{align}
$$
so ${} x+y \in N {}$. Furthermore, if ${} x \in N {}$ with degree $k {}$, then ${} ( -x )^{k}=(-1)^{k}x^{k}=0 {}$, so ${} -x \in N {}$. Finally, ${} 0^{1}=0 {}$, so ${} 0 \in N {}$. Therefore, $N$ is an abelian subgroup of $R$. Now if ${} x \in N {}$ with degree $k {}$ and ${} y \in R {}$, then 
$$
(xy)^{k}=x^{k}y^{k}=0=y^{k}x^{k}=(yx)^{k}
$$
so ${} xy,\, yx \in N {}$. Therefore, $N$ is an ideal.
8. skip
9. 
Suppose that $J {}$ is a proper ideal of ${} R$ with $J \geq I {}$. Then if ${} p \in J {}$, suppose that $p$ has nonzero constant term. Then ${} qp \in J {}$, where $q$ is a real constant. Therefore, $J$ has a polynomial with a constant term for every ${} x \in \mathbb{R} {}$, denote this by ${} p_{x}$. Now ${} p_{x}-p_{0} \in J {}$, so the constant ${} x \in J {}$. Therefore, $J$ contains every element of $R$ and is not a proper ideal. Therefore, $I=J {}$, and $I {}$ is maximal.

Let ${} p \in I {}$. Let ${} d(p) {}$ be the index of the first nonzero term of $p {}$, starting from $0 {}$. Therefore, ${} d(p)\geq 1$. Now suppose that ${} (p)=I {}$. Then every element ${} q \in I {}$ may be written as ${} q=s_{1}p+\dots+s_{n} p {}$.

If ${} d(p)=k {}$, then ${} d(s_{i}p)\geq k+1 {}$. But if ${} q=ap {}$, where $a$ is a nonzero constant, then ${} k=d(q) {}\geq k+1 {}$, which is a contradiction. Therefore, $I {}$ is not a principal ideal.
10. skip rest