---
tags:
  - exercises
  - grillet_abstract_alg
date:
count: 34
---
[[Directory]], [[Grillet Abstract Algebra]]
[[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/4.1. Fields Exercises.md|🞀🞀]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/4.1. Fields Exercises.md|◀]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/4.3. Algebraic Extensions Exercises.md|▶]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/4.9. Separability Exercises.md|🞂🞂]]
1. 
Let ${} K \subseteq E {}$ be a field extension. Then let
$$
A=\{K(S) \mid S \subseteq E \setminus K,\, \aleph(S)<\aleph_{0} \}
$$
Now for any pair of fields $K(S),\, K(T) {}$, then ${} S \cup T {}$ is finite, and so ${} K(S),\, K(T) \subseteq K(S \cup T) \in A {}$. Therefore, ${} A$ is a directed family. Furthermore, 
$$
\bigcup A=E
$$
as any element $x {}$ in ${} E$ is contained in some field ${} K(x) \in A {}$.
2. skip
3. skip
4. skip
5. skip
6. skip
7. skip
8. skip
9. skip
 (I did all of these but on paper. I'm *not* transcribing that).
 10. 
 Let $\alpha$ be transcendental over $K$. Let $\psi:K(\alpha)\to{}L {}$ be a field homomorphism. Then suppose that ${} f \in \psi(K)[X] {}$ is a polynomial such that ${} f(\psi(\alpha))=0 {}$. Then for each coefficient ${} a_{i} {}$ of ${} f$, there exists some ${} b_{i} \in K {}$ such that ${} \psi(b_{ i})=a_{i} {}$, and so there exists some ${} \tilde{f} \in K[X] {}$ such that ${} f=^{\psi}\tilde{f} {}$. Then ${} 0=f(\psi(\alpha))=^{\psi} \tilde{f}(\psi(\alpha))=\psi(\tilde{f}(\alpha)) {}$ and so since $\psi$ is a field homomorphism it is injective, and ${} \tilde{f}(\alpha)=0 {}$. This is a contradiction, therefore, $\psi(\alpha) {}$ is transcendental over ${} \psi(K) {}$

 Conversely, let ${} \varphi :K\to{}L {}$ be a field homomorphism, and let ${} \beta \in L {}$ be transcendental over ${} \varphi(K) {}$, and $\alpha$ transcendental over $K {}$. Since $\alpha {}$ is transcendental, then every element of ${} K(\alpha) {}$ is a quotient of unique polynomials ${} f,\, g \in K[X] {}$ evaluated at $\alpha {}$. Let 
$$
\begin{align}
 \psi:K(\alpha)  & \to{} L  \\
 f(\alpha) / g(\alpha)&  \mapsto {}^{\varphi}f(\beta) / {}^{\varphi}g(\beta)
 \end{align}
$$
Since $\beta$ is transcendental over ${} \varphi(K) {}$, then $\psi$ is injective. Furthermore, it's clearly closed under addition and multiplication, since $K(X)$ is. Therefore, $\psi$ is a field homomorphism extending $\varphi$ and which sends $\alpha$ to $\beta$. 

Now suppose that $\chi:K(\alpha)\to{}L {}$ is a field homomorphism extending $\varphi$ and sending $\alpha$ to $\beta$. Then ${} \chi(a)=\varphi(a) {}$ for ${} a \in K {}$, and $\chi(\alpha)=\beta {}$. Then if ${} x \in K(\alpha) {}$, then ${} x=f(\alpha)/g(\alpha) {}$
$$
\chi(x)=\frac{\chi(f(\alpha))}{\chi(g(\alpha))}=\frac{{}^{\chi}f(\chi({\alpha}))}{{}^{\chi}g(\chi({\alpha}))}=\frac{{^{\varphi}}f(\beta)}{{^{\varphi}}g(\beta)} =\psi(x)
$$
and so $\psi$ is unique.
