---
tags:
  - exercises
  - grillet_abstract_alg
date:
count: 37
---
[[Directory]], [[Grillet Abstract Algebra]]
[[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/4.1. Fields Exercises.md|🞀🞀]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/4.4. The Algebraic Closure Exercises.md|◀]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/4.6. Purely Inseparable Extensions Exercises.md|▶]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/4.9. Separability Exercises.md|🞂🞂]]
1. 
First suppose that $K {}$ is a finite field. Let ${} p=\Char K {}$, and ${} p>0 {}$. Now ${} K^{\times }$ is finite, so is cyclic and generated by a single element $\alpha {}$, and every non-zero value of ${} K$ is some power of $\alpha {}$. Hence ${} \alpha^{k}=1 {}$ iff ${} k=p^{m}-1 {}$, where ${} m=[K:\mathbb{Z}_{p}] {}$, and ${} \alpha {}$ is algebraic. In fact, 
$$
f(X)=\Irr(\alpha:\mathbb{Z}_{p})=X^{p^{m}-1}-1
$$
Now if ${} f(\beta)=0 {}$, with ${} \beta \in \conj{K} {}$, then ${} f'(X)=(p^{m}-1)X^{p^{m}-2} {}$, and so since ${} \beta^{p^{m}-1}=1 {}$, then ${} \beta^{p^{m}-2}=\beta ^{-1} {}$, and 
$$
f'(\beta)=(p^{m}-1)\beta ^{-1}=-\beta ^{-1}
$$
which may only be $0$ if $\beta$ is $0 {}$, which is itself impossible. Therefore, $K$ is separable over ${} \mathbb{Z}_{p}$, and so a inseparable irreducible polynomial must have coefficients in an infinite field of prime characteristic.

Now let ${} K=\mathbb{Z}_{2}(u) {}$, where $u$ is transcendental over ${} \mathbb{Z}_{2} {}$. Then let ${} f(X)=X^{2}-u \in K[X] {}$. Then suppose that there exists a solution ${} x \in K {}$ with ${} f(x)=0 {}$. Then
$$
x=F(u) / G(u)
$$
where ${} F,\, G \in \mathbb{Z}_{2}[X] {}$. Since ${} 0^{2}=0 {}$ and ${} 1^{2}=1 {}$, then ${} F(u)^{2}=F(u^{2}) {}$ and ${} G(u)^{2}=G(u^{2}) {}$. Therefore, 
$$
0=f(x)=\frac{F(u^{2})}{G(u^{2})}-u
$$
and
$$
F(u^{2})=uG(u^{2})
$$
Now the left hand side has all odd coefficients $0$, and the right has all even coefficients $0$. Therefore, they can only be equal if ${} F=G=0 {}$, which is a contradiction. Therefore, ${} X^{2}-u {}$ has no roots in $K$, and so is irreducible. 

Now finally, ${} f'(X)=2X=0 {}$, and so any root of $f$ in ${} \conj{K} {}$ is repeated. Therefore, $f$ is an irreducible separable polynomial.
2. 
Suppose that $E=K(S) {}$ is an algebraic extension, and each ${} \alpha \in S {}$ is separable over $K$. Then if ${} x \in E {}$, then since $E {}$ is an algebraic extension we have
$$
x=F((s_{i})_{i \in I})
$$
where ${} F \in K[(X_{i})_{i \in I}] {}$, and $I$ is finite. Then ${} K((s_{i})_{i \in I}) {}$ is finitely generated by separable elements, and so ${} K((s_{i})_{i \in I}) {}$ is separable over ${} K {}$. Hence, ${} x$ is separable over $K$, and $K(S)$ is separable over $K$. 
3. 
Let ${} K \subseteq E \subseteq F {}$ be algebraic extensions with ${} F$ separable over $K$. Then if ${} x \in E {}$, then ${} x \in F {}$, and so $x {}$ is separable over $K$. Now if ${} x \in F {}$, then ${} q=\Irr(x:K) {}$ is separable, and ${} p=\Irr(x:E) {}$ is such that ${} p \mid q {}$, and so $p {}$ is separable. Therefore, ${} x {}$ is separable over ${} E$, and $F$ is separable over $E$
4. 
Let ${} K \subseteq E \subseteq F {}$ be algebraic and $E$ be separable over $K$, and $F$ be separable over $E$. Then if ${} x \in F {}$, then ${} q=\Irr(x: E) {}$ is separable. Let ${} a_{0},\,\dots,\,a_{n} {}$ be the coefficients of $q$. Then ${} K(a_{0},\,\dots,\,a_{n}) {}$ is a finite extension of $K$, and since it is a subspace of $E$, is separable over $K$. Then ${} [K(a_{0},\,\dots,\,a_{n}):K]_{s}=[K(a_{0},\,\dots,\,a_{n}):K] {}$ is finite, and since $x$ is separable over ${} K(a_{0},\,\dots,\,a_{n}) {}$, then 
$$
[K(a_{0},\,\dots,\,a_{n},\, x): K(a_{0},\,\dots,\,a_{n})]_{s}=[K(a_{0},\,\dots,\,a_{n},\, x): K(a_{0},\,\dots,\,a_{n})]
$$
and so ${} [K(a_{0},\,\dots,\,a_{n},\, x):K]_{s}=[K(a_{0},\,\dots,\,a_{n},\, x):K] {}$, and $x$ is separable over $K$. Therefore, $F$ is separable over $K$.
5. 
Suppose that $E$ is algebraic and separable over $K$. Then $EF$ is algebraic over $KF$. Now let ${} x \in EF {}$. Then ${} x=ab^{-1} {}$, where ${} a,\, b \in E[F] {}$, and so
$$
\begin{align}
a & =\sum_{i\in I} a_{i}f_{i} &  & a_{i} \in E,\, f_{i} \in F \\
b & =\sum_{i\in J} b_{i}g_{i} &  & b_{i} \in E,\, g_{i} \in F
\end{align}
$$
Where $I,\, J {}$ are finite. Now each ${} a_{i},\, b_{i} {}$ is separable over $K$, and ${} a \in KF((a_{i})_{i \in I}) {}$. Since each ${} a_{i} {}$ are separable, then ${} KF((a_{i})_{i \in I}) {}$ is separable over $KF$, and so $a$ is separable over $KF$. Likewise, $b$ is separable over $KF {}$, and so ${} x \in KF(a,\, b) {}$ is separable over $KF$. Therefore, $EF$ is separable over $KF$.
6. 
Let ${} (E_{i})_{i \in I} {}$ with be a family of separable algebraic extensions of ${} K$, and let ${} S = \bigcup_{i\in I} E_{i} {}$. Then ${} \prod _{i \in I} E_{i}=K(S) {}$. Now since every element of $S$ is algebraic and separable over $K$, then ${} K(S) {}$ is separable over $K$. 