---
tags:
  - exercises
  - grillet_abstract_alg
date: 2025-09-24
count: 43
---
[[Directory]], [[Grillet Abstract Algebra]]
[[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/5.1. Splitting Fields Exercises.md|🞀🞀]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/5.1. Splitting Fields Exercises.md|◀]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/5.3. Galois Extensions Exercises.md|▶]] [[/Textbooks/Undergraduate/First Year/Grillet Abstract Algebra/Exercises/5.9. Geometric Constructions Exercises.md|🞂🞂]]
1. 
We have that ${} \Irr(\sqrt[3]{2}:\mathbb{Q})=x^{3}-2 {}$. It's other roots are therefore
$$
\frac{-1-i\sqrt{3}}{\sqrt[3]{4}},\, \frac{-1+i\sqrt{3}}{\sqrt[3]{4}}
$$
which are the conjugates of ${} \sqrt[3]{2} {}$ over $\mathbb{Q}$. 
2. skip
3. 
Let $F$ be normal over $K$ and let ${} K \subseteq E \subseteq F {}$. Let $\sigma$ be a $E {}$-automorphism of ${} \bar{E}=\bar{K} {}$. Then $\sigma$ is also a $K$-automorphism, and $\sigma F=F {}$, since $F$ is normal over $K$. Therefore, $F$ is normal over $E$.
4. 
Let $E$ be normal over $K$. Let $\sigma {}$ be a $KF {}$-automorphism of ${} \conj{KF}$. Then $\sigma$ may be restricted down to a $K$-automorphism of ${} \bar{K} {}$, and so $\sigma E=E {}$. Furthermore, since ${} F \subseteq KF {}$, then ${} \sigma F=F {}$. Therefore, ${} \sigma EF=EF {}$, and $EF$ is normal over $KF$.
5. 
Since $E$ and $F$ are normal over $K$, then every irreducible polynomial with a root in $E$ splits in $E$, and every irreducible polynomial with a root in $F$ splits in $F$. Then, if ${} f \in K[X] {}$ is an irreducible polynomial with a root in ${} E\cap F {}$, then $f$ splits in both $E$ and $F$. Therefore, $f$ splits in ${} E \cap F {}$, and so ${} E \cap  F {}$ is normal over $K$. 
6. 
skip
7. 
skip
8. 
skip
9. 
Suppose that ${} K^{1 /p^{\infty }}=K {}$. Let ${} x \in K {}$. There exists some ${} y \in \bar{K} {}$ such that ${} y^{p}=x {}$. Then ${} y \in K^{1/p^{\infty }}=K {}$, and so $K$ is perfect.

Conversely, suppose that $K$ is perfect, and let ${} x \in K^{1/p^{\infty }} {}$. Then ${} x^{p^{n}} \in K {}$ for some ${} n \in \mathbb{N} {}$. Therefore, ${} x^{p^{n-1}} \in K {}$, and so by induction ${} x \in K {}$. Therefore, ${} K=K^{1/p^{\infty }} {}$.
10. 
Suppose there is some ${} y \in K(X) {}$ such that ${} y^{p}=X {}$, then ${} y=f(X) {} / g(X) {}$ for some ${} f,\, g \in K[X] {}$ and ${} g$ is non-zero. Now 
$$
y^{p}= \frac{ a_{0}^{p}+a_{1}^{p}X^{p}+\dots+a_{n}^{p}X^{pn}}{b_{0}^{p}+b_{1}^{p}X^{p}+\dots+b_{n}^{p}X^{pk}} =X
$$
and so
$$
 a_{0}^{p}+a_{1}^{p}X^{p}+\dots+a_{n}^{p}X^{pn}=b_{0}^{p}X+b_{1}^{p}X^{p+1}+\dots+b_{n}^{p}X^{pk+1}
$$
Therefore ${} a_{i}^{p}=b_{i}^{p}=0 {}$, which is a contradiction and, ${} K(X) {}$ is not perfect
11. 
Suppose that every algebraic extension of a field ${} K {}$ is separable. If ${} \Char K=0 {}$, then $K {}$ is perfect. Otherwise assume that ${} \Char K=p {}$. Now let ${} \alpha \in K {}$. Suppose that there does not exist some ${} \beta \in K {}$ such that ${} \beta^{p}=\alpha {}$. Then ${} \beta \in \bar{K} -K {}$. Now $\beta$ is purely inseparable over $K {}$, and so ${} K(\beta) {}$ is a purely inseparable extension of $K$. This is a contradiction, therefore, ${} \beta \in K {}$ and $K$ is perfect.
12. 
Let $K$ be perfect, and let $E$ be an algebraic extension of $K$. Now if ${} \Char K=0 {}$, then $E$ is perfect. Otherwise, ${} \Char K=p {}$. Now let ${} \alpha \in E {}$, and let ${} \beta \in \bar{E}=\bar{K} {}$ such that ${} \beta ^{p}=\alpha {}$. Let ${} f=\Irr(\alpha:K) {}$. Then ${} f(\beta^{p})=g(\beta)^{p} {}$ for some ${} g \in K[X] {}$, as $$