---
tags:
  - greub_linalg
  - exercises
date: 2023-12-22
---
[[Directory]], [[Greub Linear Algebra 1|Subject Directory]]
[[Linear Algebra - Werner Greub.pdf#page=66|Exercise Sheet]]
7. b)
Let $E$ be a vector space, and let ${} F \subseteq E_{1} \subseteq E {}$ be subspaces. Let ${} \pi_{E_{1}}:E\to{}E/E_{1} {}$ and ${} \pi_{F}:E\to{}E / F {}$ be the projection mappings. Since ${} \ker \pi_{F}=F \subseteq  E_{1} \ker \pi_{E_{1}} {}$ there exists a mapping ${} \varphi: E /F \to{}E / E_{1} {}$ with ${} \varphi \circ \pi_{F}=\pi_{E_{1}} {}$. Since $\pi_{E_{1}}$ is surjective, then $\varphi$ is surjective. 

Now let ${} x \in \ker  \varphi {}$. Then there exists a ${} e \in E {}$ with ${} \pi_{F}(e)=x {}$, and ${} \pi_{E_{1}}(e)=1 {}$, so ${} e \in E_{1} {}$. Therefore, ${} x \in E_{1} /F {}$. Now let ${} x \in E_{1} /F {}$. Then there exists a ${} e \in E_{1} {}$ with ${} \pi_{F}(e)=x {}$. Then ${} \pi_{E_{1}}(e)=1 {}$, so ${} \varphi(\pi_{F}(e))=\varphi(x)=1 {}$. Therefore, ${} x \in \ker \varphi {}$, and ${} \ker \varphi=E_{1} /F {}$.

Now we may factor $\varphi$ into ${} \varphi=\pi \circ  \theta {}$, where ${} \pi : E /F \to{} (E /F) / (E_{1} /F) {}$ is the surjective projective map, and ${} \theta : (E /F) / (E_{1} /F) \to{} E /E_{1} {}$ is the injection. Since $\varphi$ is surjective, then so is $\theta$, so $\theta$ is an isomorphism. Therefore, ${} (E /F) / (E_{1} /F) \cong  E /E_{1} {}$.
8. 
Let ${} \chi: E /E_{1} \to{}E {}$ be a linear map which splits the sequence, i.e. ${} \pi \circ  \chi =\iota {}$. Let ${} \mathcal{C} {}$ be the set of subspaces of ${} E {}$. Let ${} \mathcal{X} {}$ be the set of splitting linear maps of the above form. Let ${} f:\mathcal{X} \to{} \mathcal{C} {}$ map ${} \chi \mapsto \im  \chi {}$. Note that if ${} x \in f(\chi) \cap E_{1} {}$, then there exists a ${} \bar{x} \in E /E_{1} {}$ with ${} \chi(\bar{x})=x {}$. Therefore, ${} \pi(x)=\pi(\chi(\bar{x}))=\bar{x} {}$. But ${} x \in E_{1} {}$, so ${} \pi(x)=0 {}$. Therefore, ${} \bar{x}=0 {}$, and ${} x=0 {}$. Therefore, ${} f(\chi)\cap E_{1}=\mathbf{0} {}$. 

Now let ${} a \in E {}$. Then ${} \pi(a- \chi(\pi(a)))=\pi(a)-\pi(a)=0 {}$, so ${} a-\chi \pi a \in E_{1} {}$. Therefore, there exists some ${} e_{1} \in E_{1} {}$ and some ${} e_{2} \in f(\chi)=\im \chi {}$ with ${} a=e_{1}+e_{2} {}$, so ${} E=E_{1} + \im \chi {}$, so ${} E=E_{1}\oplus \im \chi. {}$ Therefore, $f(\chi)$ is a complementary subspace of $E_{1}$.

Suppose that ${} \chi,\, \chi' \in \mathcal{X} {}$ with ${} f(\chi)=f(\chi') {}$. Note that $\chi$ is injective; in particular, suppose that ${} x,\, y \in E /E_{1} {}$ with ${} \chi(x)=\chi(y) {}$. Then ${} x=\pi \chi x=\pi\chi y=y  {}$. By similar reasoning, $\chi' {}$ is injective. Now let ${} x \in E /E_{1} {}$. Then there exists a unique ${} x' \in \im \chi' {}$ with ${} \chi(x)=\chi'(x') {}$. Therefore, ${} x=\pi\chi x=\pi\chi x'=x' {}$, so ${} \chi=\chi' {}$. Therefore, $f$ is injective.

Now let ${} E_{2} \in \mathcal{C} {}$ be a subspace with ${} E_{1} \oplus E_{2}=E {}$. Let ${} \chi:E /E_{1} \to{}E {}$ be defined by, given an element ${} x=e_{1}+e_{2} \in E,\, e_{1} \in E_{1},\, e_{2} \in E_{2} {}$, we have ${} \pi x=\pi e_{2}  {}$, so ${} \chi \pi x=e_{2} {}$. Now this is well defined and linear, as the representation is unique. Now $\im \chi=E_{2} {}$. Therefore, ${} \im f {}$ is a subset of the set of complementary subspaces. Since every ${} f(\chi) {}$ is a complementary subspace, then $\im f$ *is* the set of complementary subspaces. Therefore, ${} f': \mathcal{X}\to{}\im f {}$ is a bijection between splitting maps and complementary subspaces of $E_{1} {}$.
9. 
Suppose there exists a linear map ${} \omega: E \to{}F {}$ with ${} \omega \circ  \varphi = \iota {}$. Let ${} e \in E {}$. Then ${} \omega(e-\varphi\omega e)=\omega e {}-\omega e=0 {}$, so ${} e-\varphi\omega e \in \ker \omega {}$. Therefore, we have ${} e-\varphi\omega e=k \in \ker \omega {}$ and ${} \varphi \omega e=m \in \im \varphi {}$ with ${} m+k=e {}$ for all ${} e \in E {}$. Therefore, ${} E=\im \varphi + \ker  \omega {}$. 

Now let ${} e \in  {}$. Let ${} f \in F {}$ with ${} \varphi f \in \im \varphi {}$. Now if ${} \varphi f \in \ker  \omega {}$, then ${} \omega\varphi f =f=0 {}$. Therefore, ${} \varphi f=0, {}$ and $\im  \varphi \cap \ker  \omega=\mathbf{0} {}$. Therefore, ${} E = \im \varphi \oplus  \ker  \omega {}$. 

Now let ${} e \in E {}$. There exist unique ${} k \in \ker \omega {}$ and ${} m \in \im \varphi {}$ with ${} e=m+k {}$. Then ${} m \in \ker  \psi {}$, so ${} \psi e=\psi k {}$. Suppose we have ${} k' \in \ker \omega {}$ with ${} \psi k=\psi k'=\psi e {}$. Then ${} \psi(e-k')=\psi k-\psi k'=0 {}$, so ${} e-k' \in \ker \psi=\im \varphi {}$. Now we have ${} m'=e-k' {}$ with ${} e=m'+k' {}$. Therefore, ${} m'=m {}$ and ${} k'=k. {}$ Therefore, for all ${} e \in E {}$, there exists some unique ${} k \in \ker \omega {}$ with ${} \psi e=\psi k {}$. Therefore, since $\psi {}$ is surjective, then given ${} g \in G {}$, there exists some unique ${} k \in \ker \omega {}$ with ${} \psi k=g {}$. Now let ${} \chi:G \to{} E {}$ with ${} \chi(g)=\chi \psi k=k {}$. This is well defined via above, and is clearly linear. 

Now let ${} g \in G {}$. By above, there exists a unique ${} k \in \ker \omega {}$ with ${} \psi k=g {}$. Now ${} \psi\chi g=\psi\chi \psi k=\psi k=g {}$, so ${} \psi \circ  \chi=\iota {}$, so the sequence is split. Now let ${} e \in \im \chi {}$. Clearly, ${} e \in \ker  \omega,$ so ${} \im \chi=\ker \omega {}$, so the sequence
$$
0 \leftarrow F \xleftarrow{\omega} E \xleftarrow{\chi} G \leftarrow 0
$$
is exact. 

Conversely, suppose there exists a linear map ${} \chi :G \to{}E {}$ with ${} \psi \circ  \chi =\iota {}$. We showed above that this corresponds to a complementary subspace $\im \chi$ of ${} F=\ker \psi=\im \varphi {}$, so ${} E=\im \chi \oplus  \ker \psi {}$. Now let ${} e \in E {}$. Then there exists some ${} m \in \im \chi {}$ and ${} k \in \ker \psi=\im \varphi {}$. Now we have some ${} f \in F {}$ with ${} \varphi f=k {}$. We have that $f {}$ is unique, as ${} \varphi {}$ is injective. Now let ${} \omega e=\omega k=\omega\varphi f=f {}$. This is well defined by above, and clearly linear, and we have ${} \omega \circ  \varphi=\iota {}$, as required. Finally, if ${} \omega e=0 {}$, then ${} \omega e=\omega(m+k)=\omega k=0 {}$. Since $\varphi$ is injective, then ${} k=0 {}$. Therefore, ${} e=m \in \im  \chi {}$, so the sequence
$$
0 \leftarrow F \xleftarrow{\omega} E \xleftarrow{\chi} G \leftarrow 0
$$
is exact. 
10. 
Some useful Lemmas:
##### Lemma 1:
Let 
$$
\begin{CD}
E @> \varphi >> F @> \psi >> G 
\end{CD}
$$
be linear maps between vector spaces ${} E,\, F,\, G {}$. Then 
i) ${} \im (\psi \circ  \varphi) = \psi(\varphi(E))=\psi(\im \varphi) {}$
ii) ${} \ker (\psi \circ  \varphi)=\varphi ^{-1}(\ker \psi)=\varphi ^{-1}(\psi ^{-1}({0})) {}$
###### Proof:
i) Let ${} x \in \im (\psi \circ  \varphi) {}$. Then there exists some ${} e \in E {}$ with ${} \psi(\varphi(e))=x {}$. Therefore, ${} x \in \psi(\varphi(E)). {}$ Conversely, let ${} x \in \psi(\varphi(E)) {}$. Then there exists some ${} e \in E {}$ with ${} (\psi \circ \varphi)(e)=x {}$, so ${} x \in \im (\psi \circ  \varphi) {}$. Finally, we see that ${} \varphi(E)=\im E {}$, so the final part holds.

ii) Let ${} x \in \ker (\psi \circ  \varphi) {}$. Then ${} \psi(\varphi(x))=0 {}$, so ${} \varphi(x) \in \ker \psi {}$. Therefore, ${} x \in \varphi ^{-1}(\ker \psi) {}$. Conversely, let ${} x \in \varphi ^{-1}(\ker \psi) {}$. Then ${} \varphi(x)\in \ker \psi {}$, so ${} \psi(\varphi(x))=0 {}$, and ${} x \in \ker (\psi \circ \varphi) {}$. Finally, we see that ${} \ker \psi=\psi ^{-1}(0) {}$, so the final part holds.

##### Lemma 2:
Let $\varphi:E\to{}F {}$ be linear, and let ${} S \subseteq E {}$. Then 
$$
\varphi ^{-1}(\varphi(S))=S+\ker \varphi
$$
###### Proof:
Let ${} x \in \varphi ^{-1}(\varphi(S)) {}$. Then there exists some ${} y \in S {}$ with ${} \varphi(x)=\varphi(y) {}$. Therefore, ${} \varphi(x-y)=0 {}$, so ${} x-y \in \ker \varphi {}$. Therefore, there exists ${} y \in S,\, k=x-y \in \ker \varphi {}$ with ${} x=y+k {}$, so ${} x \in S+\ker \varphi {}$

Conversely, let ${} x \in S+\ker \varphi {}$. Then there exists some ${} y \in S,\, k \in \ker \varphi {}$ with ${} x=y+k {}$. Now ${} \varphi(x)=\varphi(y)+\varphi(k)=\varphi(y) {}$. Therefore, ${} x \in \varphi ^{-1}(\varphi(S)) {}$. Therefore, ${} \varphi ^{-1}(\varphi(S))=S+\ker \varphi {}$.

i)
$$
\begin{CD}
E_{1} @>\alpha_{1}>> E_{2} @>\alpha_{2}>> E_{3} @>\alpha_{3}>> E_{4} @>\alpha_{4}>> E_{5} \\
@V\varphi_{1}VV &@V\varphi_{2}VV &@V\varphi_{3}VV&@V\varphi_{4}VV&@V\varphi_{5}VV \\
F_{1} @>\beta_{1}>> F_{2} @>\beta_{2}>> F_{3} @>\beta_{3}>> F_{4} @>\beta_{4}>> F_{5}
\end{CD}
$$
Let ${} \varphi_{1} {}$ be surjective, and ${} \varphi_{4} {}$ be injective. First, let ${} k \in \alpha_{2}(\ker \varphi_{2}) {}$. Then there exists some ${} r \in \ker \varphi {}$ with $k=\alpha_{2}r {}$. Now ${} \varphi_{3}k=\varphi_{3} \alpha_{2} r=\beta_{2} \varphi_{2} r=\beta_{2} 0 =0 {}$, so ${} k \in \ker \varphi_{3} {}$.

Now we form some identities from the diagram. Consider the leftmost square. Since the diagram is commutative, we have ${} \beta_{1} \circ  \varphi_{1}=\varphi_{2} \circ  \alpha_{1} {}$. Now
$$
\begin{align}
 \im (\varphi_{2} \circ  \alpha_{1})  & =  \varphi_{2}(\im \alpha_{1}) \\
 & =\varphi_{2}(\ker \alpha_{2})
 \end{align}
$$
and
$$
\begin{align}
\im (\beta_{1} \circ  \varphi_{1})  & =\beta_{1}(\varphi_{1}(E_{1})) \\
 & =\beta_{1}(F_{1})  &  & \text{ as }\varphi_{1} \text{ is surjective} \\
 & =\im \beta_{1} \\
 & = \ker \beta_{2}
\end{align}
$$
Therefore, ${} \ker \beta_{2}=\varphi_{2}(\ker \alpha_{2}) {}$; call this equation 1.

Likewise, we have ${} \beta_{3} \circ \varphi_{3}=\varphi_{4} \circ  \alpha_{3} {}$. Now
$$
\begin{align}
\ker (\varphi_{4} \circ  \alpha_{3}) & =\alpha_{3}^{-1}(\ker \varphi_{4}) \\
 & =\alpha_{3} ^{-1}(0)  &  & \text{ as } \varphi_{4} \text{ is injective} \\
 & =\ker \alpha_{3} \\
 & =\im \alpha_{2}
\end{align}
$$
and
$$
\begin{align}
\ker (\beta_{3} \circ  \varphi_{3}) & =\varphi_{3} ^{-1} (\ker \beta_{3}) \\
 & =\varphi_{3} ^{-1} (\im \beta_{2})
\end{align}
$$
Therefore, ${} \im \alpha_{2}=\varphi_{3} ^{-1}(\im \beta_{2}) {}$; call this equation 2. 

Now let ${} k \in \ker \varphi_{3} {}$. Then ${} k \in \varphi_{3} ^{-1} (0) \subseteq \varphi_{3} ^{-1}(\im \beta_{2})=\im \alpha_{2} {}$ by equation 1. Therefore, ${} k \in \im \alpha_{2} {}$, and there exists some ${} e \in  E_{2} {}$ with ${} \alpha_{2}e=k {}$. So now
$$
0 = \varphi_{3} \alpha_{2} e = \beta_{2} \varphi_{2} e
$$
So ${} e \in \ker (\beta_{2} \circ  \varphi_{2}) {}$, so ${} e \in \varphi_{2} ^{-1}(\ker \beta_{2})=\varphi_{2} ^{-1}(\varphi_{2}(\ker \alpha_{2}))=\ker \alpha_{2} +\ker \varphi_{2} {}$ by equation 2 and lemma 2. Therefore, there exists some ${} a \in \ker \alpha_{2},\, r \in \ker \varphi_{2} {}$ with ${} e=a+r {}$. Now ${} k=\alpha_{2}e=\alpha_{2} a+\alpha_{2}r=\alpha_{2}r {}$, so ${} k \in \alpha_{2}(\ker \varphi_{2}) {}$. Therefore, 
$$
\ker \varphi_{3} = \alpha_{2} (\ker \varphi_{2})
$$
ii)
Now suppose $\varphi_{2}$ is surjective, and $\varphi_{5}$ is injective. Then let ${} m \in\im \varphi_{3} {}$. Then there exists some ${} e \in E_{3} {}$ with ${} \varphi_{3}e=m {}$. Now ${} \beta_{3} m =\beta_{3} \varphi_{3} e=\varphi_{4} \alpha_{3} e \in \im \varphi_{4} {}$. Therefore, ${} m \in \beta_{3} ^{-1}(\im \varphi_{4}) {}$.

Now we form some identities from the diagram. Since the diagram is commutative, we have ${} \beta_{2} \circ  \varphi_{2} = \varphi_{3} \circ  \alpha_{2} {}$. Now
$$
\begin{align}
\im (\varphi_{3} \circ  \alpha_{2}) & =\varphi_{3} (\im \alpha_{2}) \\
 & =\varphi_{3}(\ker \alpha_{3})
\end{align}
$$
and
$$
\begin{align}
 \im (\beta_{2} \circ  \varphi_{2})  & = \beta_{2}(\im \varphi_{2}) \\
 & =\beta_{2}(F_{2}) &  & \text{ as } \varphi_{2} \text{  is surjective} \\
 & =\im \beta_{2} \\
 & =\ker \beta_{3}  
 \end{align}
$$
Therefore, ${} \varphi_{3}(\ker \alpha_{3})=\ker \beta_{3} {}$.

Similarly, consider ${} \beta_{4} \circ \varphi_{4} = \varphi_{5} \circ  \alpha_{4} {}$. Now
$$
\begin{align}
\ker (\varphi_{5} \circ  \alpha_{4}) & =\alpha_{4} ^{-1}(\ker \varphi_{5}) \\
 & =\alpha_{4}^{-1} (0)  &  & \text{ as } \varphi_{5} \text{  is injective} \\
 & =\ker \alpha_{4} \\
 & =\im \alpha_{3}
\end{align}
$$
and
$$
\begin{align}
\ker (\beta_{4} \circ  \varphi_{4}) & =\varphi_{4} ^{-1}(\ker \beta_{4}) \\
 & =\varphi_{4} ^{-1}(\im  \beta_{3})
\end{align}
$$
Therefore, ${} \varphi_{4} ^{-1}(\im \beta_{3})=\im \alpha_{3} {}$.

Now let ${} m \in \beta_{3} ^{-1}(\im \varphi_{4}) {}$. Then there exists some ${} e \in E_{4}$ with ${} \beta_{3}m=\varphi_{4}e {}$. Therefore, ${} e \in \varphi_{4}^{-1}(\im \beta_{3})=\im \alpha_{3} {}$. Therefore, there exists some ${} a \in E_{3} {}$ with ${} \alpha_{3} a=e {}$. Now 
$$
\beta_{3} m=\varphi_{4}e= \varphi_{4}\alpha_{3} a=\beta_{3} \varphi_{3} a
$$
So ${} \beta_{3} (m -\varphi_{3}a)=0 {}$, and ${} m-\varphi_{3} a \in \ker \beta_{3}=\varphi_{3}(\ker  \alpha_{3})\subseteq \im \varphi_{3} {}$. Therefore ${} m-\varphi_{3}a \in \im \varphi_{3} {}$, so ${} m \in \im \varphi_{3} {}$. Therefore, ${} \im \varphi_{3}= \beta_{3} ^{-1} (\im \varphi_{4}) {}$.
iii)
Let $\varphi_{1}$ be surjective, $\varphi_{2}$ and $\varphi_{4}$ be isomorphisms, and let $\varphi_{5}$ be injective. Then i) holds, so ${} \ker \varphi_{3}=\alpha_{2}(\ker \varphi_{2})=\alpha_{2}(0)=0 {}$, so $\varphi_{3}$ is injective, and ii) holds, so ${} \im \varphi_{3}=\beta_{3}^{-1}( \im \varphi_{4})=\beta_{3} ^{-1}(F_{4})=F_{3} {}$, so $\varphi_{3}$ is surjective. Therefore, $\varphi_{3} {}$ is a linear isomorphism.

11. 
First, we see that, using the exactness and commutativity, 
$$
\begin{align}
 H_{i+1\,j} &  = (\ker \varphi_{i+1\,j} \cap \ker \psi_{i+1\,j}) / \im (\psi_{i\, j} \circ  \varphi_{i\,j-1})   \\
 & =(\im \psi_{i\,j} \cap \ker \varphi_{i+1 \,j}) / \psi_{i\,j}[\im \varphi_{i\,j-1}] \\
 & =(\im \psi_{i\,j} \cap \ker \varphi_{i+1 \,j}) / \psi_{i\,j}[\ker \varphi_{i\,j}]
 \end{align}
$$
and
$$
\begin{align}
 H_{i\,j+1} &  = (\ker \varphi_{i\,j+1} \cap \ker \psi_{i\,j+1}) / \im (\psi_{i-1\, j+1} \circ  \varphi_{i-1\,j})   \\
 & =(\im \varphi_{i\,j} \cap \ker \psi_{i \,j+1}) / \im (\varphi_{i\,j} \circ  \psi_{i-1\,j}) \\
 & =(\im \varphi_{i\,j} \cap \ker \psi_{i \,j+1}) / \varphi_{i\,j} [\im \psi_{i-1\,j}] \\
 & =(\im \varphi_{i\,j} \cap \ker \psi_{i \,j+1}) / \varphi_{i\,j} [\ker \psi_{i\,j}] \\
 \end{align}
$$
Let ${} Z=\psi_{i\,j} ^{-1}[\ker \varphi_{i+1 \, j}] \cap \varphi_{i\,j} ^{-1} [\ker  \psi_{i\,j+1}] {}$, and let ${} K=\ker \varphi_{i\,j}+\ker  \psi_{i\,j} {}$. Also let ${} G_{i+1\,j}=\im \psi_{i\,j} \cap \ker \varphi_{i+1 \,j} {}$ and ${} G_{i\,j+1}=\im \varphi_{i\,j} \cap \ker \psi_{i \,j+1} {}$. We consider the following, where ${} \pi_{1} {}$ and $\pi_{2} {}$ are the canonical projections from $Z {}$ to ${} Z/K {}$ and ${} G_{i+1\,j} {}$ to ${} H_{i+1\,j} {}$ respectively, and ${} \conj{\psi_{i\,j}} {}$ is the unique linear transformation such that the following diagram commutes
$$
\begin{CD}
\psi_{i\,j} ^{-1}[\ker \varphi_{i+1 \, j}] \cap \varphi_{i\,j} ^{-1} [\ker  \psi_{i\,j+1}] @>\psi_{i\,j}>> \operatorname{im} \psi_{i\,j} \cap \ker \varphi_{i+1 \,j} \\
@VV\pi_{1} V @V\pi_{2}VV \\
\psi_{i\,j} ^{-1}[\ker \varphi_{i+1 \, j}] \cap \varphi_{i\,j} ^{-1} [\ker  \psi_{i\,j+1}] /(\ker \varphi_{i\,j}+\ker  \psi_{i\,j}) @>>\conj{\psi_{i\,j}}>\operatorname{im} \psi_{i\,j} \cap \ker \varphi_{i+1\,j} / \psi_{i\,j}[\ker \psi_{i\,j}]
\end{CD}
$$
This can be seen more clearly as
$$
\begin{CD}
Z @>\psi_{i\,j}>> G_{i+1\,j}\\
@VV\pi_{1} V @V\pi_{2}VV\\
Z / K @>>\conj{\psi_{i\,j}}> H_{i+1\,j}
\end{CD}
$$
We shall show that ${} \conj{\psi_{i\,j}} {}$ is an isomorphism. First let ${} x,\, y \in Z {}$ such that ${} \conj{\psi_{i\,j}}\pi_{1} x=\conj{\psi_{i\,j}}\pi_{1} y {}$. Since $\pi_{1} {}$ is surjective, then this corresponds to any 2 elements ${} X,\, Y \in Z /K {}$. Since the above diagram commutes, then ${} \pi_{2} \psi_{i\,j} x=\pi_{2} \psi_{i\,j} y {}$. Therefore, ${} \psi_{i\,j}(x-y) \in \ker \pi_{2}=\psi_{i\,j}[\ker \varphi_{i\,j}] {}$, so ${} x-y \in \ker \varphi_{i\,j} {}$, and ${} \pi_{1}(x-y)=0 {}$, as ${} \ker  \pi_{1}=\ker \varphi_{i\,j}+\ker \psi_{i\,j} {}$. Therefore, ${} \pi_{1}x=\pi_{1} y {}$, so ${} \conj{\psi_{i\,j}}$  is injective. 

Now let ${} X \in G_{i+1\,j} {}$. Now ${} G_{i+1\,j} {}$