---
tags:
  - intro_algebra1
  - chapter
date: 2023-11-20
---
[[Directory]], [[Intro to Algebra 1|Subject Directory]]
## Functions on ${} \mathbb{Z}_{n} {}$
A note
### Example:
What's wrong with this sentence?
"Define ${} f:\mathbb{Z}_{3}\to{}\mathbb{Z} {}$ by $f([a]_{3})=a$"
This doesn't make sense:
ex. ${} [0]_{3}=[3]_{3} {}$, but $f([0]_{3})=0\neq 3=f([3]_{3})$.
We say that $f$ is not well defined. That means the formula does not give a map on $\mathbb{Z}_{3}$.
#### Note: 
${} f:\mathbb{Z}_{n}\to{}S {}$ gives a function iff ${} f([a]_{n})=f([b]_{n}) {}$ whenever $[a]_{n}=[b]_{n} {}$ (although not necessarily vice versa). In this case we say that ${} f {}$ is well defined.
### Example:
Let ${} f:\mathbb{Z}_{2}\to{}\mathbb{R}^{\times } {}$ be defined by ${} f([a]_{2})=(-1)^{a} {}$ for all $[a]_{2}\in \mathbb{Z}_{2}$. Show that $f$ is well defined
#### Proof:
Assume ${} [a]_{2}=[b]_{2} {}$. We need to show that ${} f([a]_{2})=f([b]_{2}) {}$. Since ${} [a]_{2}=[b]_{2} {}$, we have ${} a=2k+b {}$ for some ${} k \in \mathbb{Z} {}$. Then
$$
\begin{align}
f([a]_{2}) & =(-1)^{a} \\
 & =(-1)^{2k+b} \\
 & =(-1)^{2k}(-1)^{b} \\
 & =(-1)^{b} \\
 & =f([b]_{2})
\end{align}
$$
#### Note: 
We have $f$ is a homomorphism. Proof:
let ${} [a]_{2},\, [b]_{2} \in \mathbb{Z}_{2}$. Then
$$
\begin{align}
f([a]_{2}+[b]_{2})  & =f([a+b]_{2}) \\
& =(-1)^{a+b} \\
 & =(-1)^{a}(-1)^{b} \\
 & =f([a]_{2})f([b]_{2})
\end{align}
$$
As required.
# Homomorphisms
## Properties of Homomorphisms
All day: take ${} (G_{1},\, *_{1}) {}$ a group with identity $e_{1}$
            take ${} (G_{2},\, *_{2}) {}$ a group with identity $e_{2}$
### Proposition 1.1
Assume $\varphi:G_{1}\to{}G_{2} {}$ is a group homomorphism. Then
1. ${} \varphi(e_{1})=e_{2} {}$
2. ${} \varphi(g^{-1})=\varphi(g)^{-1} {}$
#### Proof:
1. 
We have 
$$
\begin{align}
 \varphi(e_{1})*_{2}\varphi(e_{1}) & =\varphi(e_{1}*_{1}e_{1})   \\
 & =\varphi(e_{1}) \\
 & =\varphi (e_{1})*_{2}e_{2}
 \end{align}
$$
By the cancellation law, ${} \varphi (e_{1})=e_{2} {}$.
2. 
Just need to show that ${} \varphi(g)*_{2}\varphi(g^{-1})=e_{2} {}$
$$
\begin{align}
 \varphi(g)*_{2}\varphi(g^{-1})  & =\varphi(g g^{-1}) &  & \text{ since } \varphi \text{ is a homomorphism}  \\
 & =\varphi(e_{1}) \\
 & =e_{2}
 \end{align}
$$

Therefore, $\varphi(g^{-1})=\varphi(g)^{-1}$.
### Proposition 1.2
If $\varphi:G_{1}\to{}G_{2} {}$ is a homomorphism, then ${} \varphi(g^{k})=\varphi(g)^{k} {}$ for all ${} g \in G {}$ and ${} k \in \mathbb{Z} {}$
#### Proof:
On homework sheet (done it with [[D&F Abstract Algebra]])
### Definition 1.3: Kernel of a homomorphism
Let ${} \varphi:G_{1}\to{}G_{2} {}$ be a homomorphism. The *kernel* of $\varphi$ is 
$$
\ker \varphi=\{ g \in G_{1} \mid\varphi(g)=e_{2} \}
$$
#### Example:
Last time, we looked at 
$$
\varphi :\mathbb{Z} \to{}S_{3},\,  \varphi(n)=g^{n}\qquad \text{ where } g=(1\;2\;3)
$$
Then
$$
\ker \varphi \{ n \in \mathbb{Z}\mid \varphi(n)=e \}=\{ n \in \mathbb{Z}\mid g^{n}=e \}=3\mathbb{Z}
$$
Since ${} |(1\;2\;3)|=3 {}$, so ${} g^{n}=e {}$ iff $3\mid n$
### Definition 1.4: Image of a homomorphism
Let $\varphi:G_{1}\to{}G_{2}$ be a homomorphism. The *image* of $\varphi$ is exactly what you expect:
$$
\im \varphi=\{ \varphi(g)\mid g \in G_{1} \}
$$
#### Example:
In the above example, ${} \im \varphi=\langle (1\;2\;3) \rangle =\{ (),\, (1\;2\;3),\, (1\;3\;2) \} {}$
### Proposition 1.5
Let $\varphi:G_{1}\to{}G_{2} {}$ be a homomorphism. Then
1. $\ker \varphi {}$ is a subgroup of ${} G_{1} {}$
2. $\im \varphi$ is a subgroup of $G_{2}$
#### Proof:
1. 
We'll use the subgroup test. 
If ${} g,\, h \in  \ker \varphi {}$, then ${} \varphi(g)=\varphi(h)=e_{2} {}$. Therefore, 
$$
\begin{align}
\varphi(gh) & =\varphi(g)\varphi(h) \\
 & =e_{2}e_{2} \\
 & =e_{2} \\
\end{align}
$$
Therefore, ${} gh \in \ker \varphi {}$
Next, ${} \varphi(e_{1})=e_{2}$. Therefore, ${} e_{1} \in \ker \varphi {}$
Finally, let ${} g \in \ker \varphi {}$. Consider
$$
\begin{align}
\varphi(g g^{-1}) & =\varphi(e_{1})=e_{2} \\
 & =\varphi(g)\varphi(g^{-1}) \\
 & =e_{2}\varphi(g^{-1}) \\
 & =\varphi(g^{-1})
\end{align}
$$
Therefore, ${} \varphi(g^{-1})=e_{2} {}$, therefore, ${} g^{-1} \in \ker \varphi$
2. 
On sheet 8 (done with [[D&F Abstract Algebra]])
### Lemma 1.6
Let $\varphi:G_{1}\to{}G_{2} {}$ be a homomorphism. Then $\varphi$ is injective iff $\ker \varphi=\{ e_{1} \} {}$ i.e. is trivial.
#### Proof:
First working ${} (\Rightarrow ) {}$. Assume ${} \varphi$ is injective. Let ${} g \in \ker \varphi$. Then
$$
\varphi(g)=e_{2}=\varphi(e_{1})
$$
Since $\varphi$ is injective, then ${} g=e_{1}$, so $\ker \varphi=\{ e_{1} \}$
Now working ${} (\Leftarrow )$. Assume ${} \ker \varphi=\{ e_{1} \} {}$. Assume for some ${} g,\, h \in G_{1} {}$, we have ${} \varphi(g)=\varphi(h) {}$. 
Therefore, 
$$
\begin{align}
\varphi(g)\varphi(h)^{-1} & =\varphi(h)\varphi(h)^{-1} \\
\varphi(g)\varphi(h)^{-1} & =e_{2} \\
\varphi(g)\varphi(h^{-1}) & =e_{2}  \\
\varphi(gh^{-1}) & =e_{2}
\end{align}
$$
Therefore, since the kernel is trivial, then $gh^{-1}=e_{1}$, so ${} g=h {}$. Therefore, $\varphi$ is injective.
#### Caution:
This only works if $\varphi$ is a homomorphism
### Example:
Let $\varphi: \mathbb{Z}_{6}\to{}\mathbb{Z}_{2}\times \mathbb{Z}_{3}$ defined by $\varphi([a]_{6})=([a]_{2},\, [a]_{3})$
Claim: $\varphi$ is a well defined homomorphism. 
If ${} [a]_{6}=[b]_{6} {}$, then ${} 6\mid b-a {}$. So ${} 3\mid b-a {}$ and ${} 2\mid b-a {}$
So ${} [a]_{3}=[b]_{3} {}$ and $[a]_{2}=[b]_{2}$. Therefore, ${} \varphi([a]_{6})=\varphi([b]_{6}) {}$

Now if we have
$$
\begin{align}
 \varphi([a]_{6}+[b]_{6})  & =\varphi([a+b]_{6}) \\
	 & =([a+b]_{2},\, [a+b]_{3}) \\
 & =([a]_{2},\, [a]_{3}) +([b]_{2},\, [b]_{3}) \\
 & =\varphi([a]_{6})+\varphi([b]_{6})
 \end{align}
$$
Now we claim that $\varphi$ is injective. We show this by using the kernel.
Assume ${} [a]_{6}\in \ker \varphi {}$. Therefore, $\varphi([a]_{6})=([0]_{2},\, [0]_{3})$, so
$$
\begin{align}
 ([a]_{2},\, [a]_{3}) & =([0]_{2},\, [0]_{3})   \\
 [a]_{2}=[0]_{2} &\text{ and } [a]_{3}=[0]_{3} \\
2\mid a &\text{ and } 3\mid a \\
 \end{align}
$$
Therefore, $6\mid a {}$, so ${} [a]_{6}=[0]_{6} {}$, so $\ker \varphi=\{ [0]_{6} \}$.
### Proposition 1.7
Let ${} \varphi:G_{1}\to{}G_{2}$ is a group homomorphism and ${} \psi:G_{2}\to{}G_{3}$ is a group homomorphism. Then ${} \psi \circ \varphi :G_{1}\to{}G_{3}$ is a group homomorphism.
#### Proof: 
We want to show that 
$$
(\psi \circ \varphi)(gh)=((\psi \circ \varphi)(g))((\psi \circ \varphi)(h))\qquad \forall  g,\, h \in G_{1}
$$
so
$$
\begin{align}
(\psi \circ \varphi)(gh) & =\psi(\varphi(gh)) \\
 & =\psi(\varphi(g)\varphi(h)) \\
 & =\psi(\varphi(g))\psi(\varphi(h)) \\
 & =(\psi \circ \varphi)(g) \ (\psi \circ \varphi)(h)
\end{align}
$$
As required. 
### Definition 1.8: Isomorphisms
An *isomorphism* is a bijective homomorphism. We say that 2 groups $G_{1},\, G_{2}$ are *isomorphic* if there exists an isomorphism.
### Exam
