---
tags:
  - chapter
  - intro_algebra1
date: 2023-10-26
---
[[Directory]], [[Intro to Algebra 1|Subject Directory]]
# Congruence Classes
## Multiplicative Group of Congruence classes
### Proposition 1.1: Inverses in ${} \mathbb{Z} /n\mathbb{Z} {}$
Let ${} a \in \mathbb{Z} {}$ and $n \in\mathbb{N}$. Then ${} \exists b\in \mathbb{Z} {}$ such that ${} ab\equiv 1\:(\mathrm{mod}\  n)  {}$ iff ${} \gcd(a,\, n)=1 {}$.
#### Proof:
${} (\Leftarrow )$. Assume $\gcd(a,\, n)=1$. Then $\exists x,\, y \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that $ax+ny=1 {}$, by previous proofs. So we have
$$
ax=n(-y)+1
$$
Therefore, 
$$
ax=1\:(\mathrm{mod}\  n) 
$$
Now ${} (\Rightarrow )$. Assume ${} \exists b \in \mathbb{Z}$ such that ${} ab\equiv 1\:(\mathrm{mod}\  n)  {}$. Then , ${} \exists k\in \mathbb{Z} {}$ such that ${} ab+kn=1 {}$. By previous proofs, we then have that ${} \gcd(a,\, n)=1$.

We want to use this to find the inverse for $[a]_{n}$
### Potential Issue:
What about when ${} [a_{1}]_{n}=[a_{2}]_{n} {}$?
### Proposition 1.2: GCD does not depend on Representative
Let ${} a,\, b \in \mathbb{Z}$, ${} n \in \mathbb{N} {}$, and assume ${} a\equiv b\:(\mathrm{mod}\  n)  {}$. Then $\gcd(a,\, n)=\gcd(b,\, n) {}$
#### Proof:
${} a\equiv b\:(\mathrm{mod}\  n) \Rightarrow \exists k \in  \mathbb{Z}\ s.t. a=b+nk {}$
${} \Rightarrow  \gcd(a,\, n)=\gcd(b,\, n) {}$
Define ${} \mathbb{Z}_{n}^{\times}=\{ [a]_{n}\mid \gcd(a,\, n)=1 \} {}$
### Proposition 1.3: 
${} \mathbb{Z}_{n}^{\times}$ forms a group under multiplication.
#### Proof:
We already saw that
- multiplication is associative
- ${} [1]_{n} {}$ is an identity under multiplication
By ${} 1.1$, then every element of ${} \mathbb{Z}_{n}^{\times} {}$ has an inverse. Therefore, $\mathbb{Z}_{n}^{\times} {}$ is a group.
#### Examples:
$$
\begin{align}
\mathbb{Z}_{3}^{\times} & =\{ [1]_{3},\, [2]_{3} \} \\
\mathbb{Z}_{4}^{\times} & =\{ [1]_{4},\, [3]_{4} \} \\
\mathbb{Z}_{6}^{\times} & =\{ [1]_{6},\, [5]_{6} \}
\end{align}
$$
# Product Groups
## Introduction
### Definition 2.1
Let ${} (G_{1},\, *_{1}) {}$ and ${} (G_{2},\, *_{2})$ be groups.
Let ${} \star:G_{1}\times G_{2}\to{}G_{1}\times G_{2} {}$ be a binary operation defined by
$$
(a_{1},\, b_{1})\star(a_{2},\, b_{2})=(a_{1}*_{1}a_{2},\, b_{1}*_{2}b_{2})
$$
For all ${} a_{1},\, a_{2}\in G_{1} {}$ and $b_{1},\, b_{2}\in G_{2}$. Then ${} (G_{1}\times G_{2},\, \star) {}$ is defined to be the *direct product* of $G_{1} {}$ and $G_{2} {}$, confusingly denoted ${} G_{1}\times G_{2} {}$
#### Examples:
Let ${} G_{1}=\mathbb{Z}_{2},\,G_{2}=\mathbb{Z}_{3}^{\times} {}$. Then
$$
G_{1}\times G_{2}=\{ ([0]_{2},\, [1]_{3}),\, ([0]_{2},\, [2]_{3}),\, ([1]_{2},\, [1]_{3}),\, ([1]_{2},\, [2]_{3}) \}
$$
So then
$$
([a]_{2},\, [b]_{3})\star ([c]_{2},\, [d]_{3})=([a+c]_{2},\, [bd]_{3})
$$
### Proposition 2.2: Direct Product is a Group
${} (G_{1}\times G_{2},\, \star)$ forms a group
#### Proof: 
1. ${} \star {}$ is associative. This is an exercise.
2. We need $e \in  G_{1}\times G_{2}$. Let ${} 1 \in G_{1} {}$ and ${} 1 \in  G_{2}$ be identity elements. Then given $k=(a, b) \in G_{1}\times G_{2}$, then
$$
(1,\, 1)\star(a,\, b)=(1a,\, 1b)=(a,\, b)
$$
and
$$
(a,\, b)\star(1,\, 1)=(a 1,\, b 1)=(a,\, b)
$$
Therefore ${} (1,\, 1)$ is an identity element of $G_{1}\times G_{2}$.
