---
tags:
  - intro_algebra1
  - chapter
date: 2023-12-07
---
[[Directory]], [[Intro to Algebra 1|Subject Directory]]
# Units
## 
### Examples:
1. 
Let $R=\mathbb{R} {}$. The units of $R$ are ${} R\setminus\{0\}=\mathbb{R}^{\times } {}$
Similarly for the units of ${} \mathbb{C} {}$ are ${} \mathbb{C}^{\times }=\mathbb{C}\setminus \{ 0 \} {}$
2. 
Recall that ${} [a]_{n}\in \mathbb{Z}_{n} {}$ has an inverse under multiplication iff ${} \gcd(a,\, n)=1 {}$. Therefore, the units in $\mathbb{Z}_{n}$ are ${} \mathbb{Z}_{n}^{\times }=\{ [a]_{n}\mid \gcd(a,\, n)=1 \} {}$
3. 
Let ${} R=M_{2}(\mathbb{R}) {}$ be a ring. Recall that iff ${} A \in  M_{2}(\mathbb{R}) {}$ has $\det A\neq 0 {}$, then $A {}$ has an inverse under multiplication. Therefore, the units of ${} M_{2}(\mathbb{R}) {}$ are ${} GL_{2}(\mathbb{R}) {}$.

All this leads us to the following proposition
### Proposition 1.1:
Let ${} R$ be a ring. Then the set of units ${} R^{\times } {}$, is a group under multiplication.
#### Proof:
First, we need to prove that multiplication is a binary operation on ${} R^{\times } {}$. Let ${} r,\, s \in R^{\times } {}$. Since ${} r,\, s {}$ are units, there exist ${} x,\,  y \in R {}$ with ${} rx=xr=1 {}$ and ${} sy=ys=1 {}$. Now note that
$$
\begin{align}
(rs)(yx) & =r((sy)x) \\
 & =r(1 x) \\
 & =rx \\
 & =1
\end{align}
$$
and the same holds for ${} (yx)(rs)=1 {}$. Therefore, ${} yx {}$ is an inverse of $rs {}$, so ${} rs {}$ is a unit. Therefore, ${} R^{\times } {}$ is closed under multiplication. 

Since ${} R {}$ is a ring, then multiplication is associative on ${} R^{\times } {}$. We have ${} 1\cdot 1=1\cdot 1=1 {}$, so the identity has a inverse under multiplication, so ${} 1 \in R^{\times } {}$. Finally, let ${} r \in R^{\times } {}$. Then since $r$ is a unit, then there exists some ${} s \in R {}$ with ${} rs=sr=1 {}$, so $r$ is invertible in $R$. But by definition, then $s$ is also a unit, so $r$ is invertible in ${} R^{\times } {}$. Therefore, ${} R^{\times }$ is a group under multiplication. 
# Ring Homomorphisms
## Introduction
### Definition 2.1
Let ${} (R_{1},\, +_{1},\, *_{1}),\, (R_{2},\, +_{2},\, *_{2}) {}$ be rings. A function $\varphi:R_{1}\to{}R_{2} {}$ is a *ring homomorphism* if
1. ${} \forall r,\, s \in R:\varphi(r+_{1}s)=\varphi(r)+_{2}\varphi(s) {}$
2. ${} \forall r,\, s \in R_{1}: \varphi(r*_{1}s)=\varphi(r)*_{2}\varphi(s) {}$
3. ${} \varphi(1_{R_{1}})=1_{R_{2}} {}$
#### Note:
1. Says that $\varphi$ is a group homomorphism from ${} (R_{1},\, +_{1})\to{\qquad}(R_{2},\, +_{2}) {}$
#### Examples:
${} \varphi :\mathbb{Z} \to{}\mathbb{Z}_{n} {}$, with ${} \varphi(a)=[a]_{n} {}$ This is a ring homomorphism, as
1. ${} \varphi(a+b)=[a+b]_{n}=[a]_{n}+[b]_{n}=\varphi(a)+\varphi(b) {}$
2. ${} \varphi (ab)$
### Definition 2.2:
A *ring isomorphism* is a bijective ring homomorphisms