---
tags:
  - intro_algebra1
  - chapter
date: 2023-12-14
---
[[Directory]], [[Intro to Algebra 1|Subject Directory]]
# Fields
## 
### Examples:
${} \mathbb{Q},\, \mathbb{R},\, \mathbb{C} {}$ are all fields
$\mathbb{Z}_{n}$ is a field iff $n$ is prime. If $n$ is prime, and ${} \mathbb{Z}_{n}^{\times }=\{ [1],\, [2],\,\dots,\,[n-1] \} {}$. Otherwise, $a \mid n {}$, and ${} [a] \notin \mathbb{Z}_{n}^{\times } {}$
### Proposition 1.1:
If $R$ is a field, then $R$ is an integral domain.
#### Proof:
Assume $R$ is a field. Suppose there exist ${} x,\, y \in R {}$ with ${} xy=0 {}$. If ${} x=0 {}$, then $R {}$ is still an integral domain. Otherwise, $x\neq 0 {}$, so ${} x^{-1}xy=0 {}$, so ${} y=0 {}$, and $R {}$. Therefore, if ${} xy=0 {}$, then either ${} x=0 {}$, or ${} y=0 {}$, is ${} R {}$ is an integral domain.

Conversely, note that $\mathbb{Z}$ is a ring which is an integral domain but isn't a field.
## Chinese Remainder Theorem
### Theorem 1.2
Let ${} n,\, m \in \mathbb{N} {}$ with ${} \gcd(n,\, m)=1 {}$. Then 
$$
\varphi(\mathbb{Z}_{mn})\to{}\mathbb{Z}_{m} \times  \mathbb{Z}_{n}
$$
defined by
$$
\varphi([a]_{mn})=([a]_{m},\, [a]_{n})
$$
is a well-defined ring homomorphism.
### Corollary 1.3: The Chinese Remainder Theorem
Let ${} a,\, b,\, m,\, n \in \mathbb{Z} {}$ with ${} \gcd(m,\, n)=1 {}$. Consider the equations
$$
\begin{align}
x & \equiv a\:(\mathrm{mod}\  n)  \text{ and} \\
x  & \equiv  b \:(\mathrm{mod}\  m) 
\end{align}
$$
Then 
1. There exist ${} x \in \mathbb{Z} {}$ satisfies those equations
2. if ${} y \equiv  a \:(\mathrm{mod}\  n)  {}$ and ${} y\equiv b \:(\mathrm{mod}\  m)  {}$, then 
$$
x\equiv y\:(\mathrm{mod}\  mn) 
$$
#### Example:
Find all $x$ satisfying
$$
\begin{align}
 x & \equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  2)    \\
x & \equiv 2 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  5) 
 \end{align}

$$
${} x=7 {}$ is a solution, so by the CRT, the set of all solutions is
$$
\{ y \in \mathbb{Z} \mid 7\equiv y \:(\mathrm{mod}\   10)  \}=\{ 7+10k \mid k \in \mathbb{Z}\}
$$
How to find the first solutions?
#### Example:
Find all $x$ such that 
$$
\begin{align}
 x & \equiv 2 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  5)  \\
x & \equiv 4\:(\mathrm{mod}\  7) 
\end{align}
$$

First, find ${} c,\, d \in \mathbb{Z} {}$ such that ${} 5c+7d=1 {}$. These exist because ${} 5,\, 7 {}$ are relatively prime. We can use the Euclidian algorithm, but I can't be fucked, so we can just look at it and use our branes. 

In our case, ${} 5 (3) + 7 (-2)=1 {}$. So
$$
\begin{align}
 5 (3) + 7 (-2)  & \equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  5)  \\
 7 (-2) & \equiv  1\:(\mathrm{mod}\  5)   \\
\Rightarrow \quad7(-4) & \equiv  2 \:(\mathrm{mod}\   5) 
 \end{align}
$$
and 
$$
\begin{align}
5 (3) + 7 (-2) & \equiv 1\:(\mathrm{mod}\  7)  \\
5 (3) & \equiv  1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  7)  \\
\Rightarrow  \quad5(12) & \equiv 4 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  7) 
\end{align}
$$
Let ${} x=5(12)+7(-4) {}$. Then ${} x\equiv 2\:(\mathrm{mod}\  5)  {}$, and ${} x\equiv 4\:(\mathrm{mod}\  7)  {}$. So ${} x=32 {}$. Now, by the CRT, the set of *all* solutions is
$$
\{ y \in Z \mid  y\equiv 32 \:(\mathrm{mod}\   35)  \}=\{ 32+35k \mid k \in \mathbb{Z} \}
$$
and we are done.
### General Method
Say we are trying to find all $x$ such that 
$$
\begin{align}
	x & \equiv a\:(\mathrm{mod}\  m) \\
x & \equiv b \:(\mathrm{mod}\  n)  
\end{align}
$$
To find a value for $x$:
1. Find ${} c,\, d \in \mathbb{Z} {}$ with ${} mc+nd=1 {}$
2. Then we have 
$$
\begin{align}
nd(a) & \equiv a\:(\mathrm{mod}\  m)  \\
mc(b) & \equiv b \:(\mathrm{mod}\  n) 
\end{align}
$$
so let ${} x=nda+mcb {}$, which satisfies the equation
3. Now to find all possible solutions, we use the CRT:
$$
\{ y \in \mathbb{Z} \mid y\equiv x \:(\mathrm{mod}\   mn)  \}=\{ x+mnk \mid k \in \mathbb{Z} \}
$$
