---
tags:
  - chapter
  - intro_algebra1
date: 2023-10-19
---
[[Directory]], [[Intro to Algebra 1|Subject Directory]]
# Binary Relations
## Congruence Classes on ${} \mathbb{Z}_{n}$
### Lemma 1.1
Let ${} a,\, b\in \mathbb{Z} {}$. Then ${} a\equiv b\:(\mathrm{mod}\  n) {}$ iff ${} [a]_{n}=[b]_{n} {}$

#### Proof:
${} (\Rightarrow) {}$Assume $a\equiv b\:(\mathrm{mod}\  n)$. First we show that ${} [a]_{n}\subseteq[b]_{n} {}$.
Let ${} c \in [a]_{n} {}$. then by definition, we know that 
$$
\begin{align}
a\equiv c\:(\mathrm{mod}\  n) 
\end{align}
$$
and by assumption, we know that
$$
a\equiv b\:(\mathrm{mod}\  n) 
$$
Therefore, by the transitivity of $\equiv$, 
$$
b\equiv c\:(\mathrm{mod}\  n) 
$$
Therefore, by definition, $c\in [b]_{n}$.
The proof that ${} [b]_{n}\subseteq[a]_{n}$ is exactly the same.

${} (\Leftarrow )$ Assume that ${} [a]_{n}=[b]_{n} {}$. We know that ${} a\equiv a\:(\mathrm{mod}\  n)  {}$. Therefore, 
$$
a\in [a]_{n}
$$
And by our assumption, we have
$$
a\in [b]_{n}
$$
And by definition
$$
a\equiv b\:(\mathrm{mod}\  n) 
$$
$\square {}$.

### Lemma 1.2
Let ${} a \in \mathbb{Z} {}$. Then there must exist ${} r \in  \mathbb{Z}$ with ${} 0\le r<n {}$ such that
$$
[a]_{n}=[r]_{n}
$$
#### Proof:
By the division algorithm, there exists ${} q,\, r \in  \mathbb{Z} {}$, with $0\leq r<n {}$ such that
$$
a=qn+r
$$
We saw in last lecture, that this implies that
$$
a\equiv r \:(\mathrm{mod}\  n) 
$$
And by Lemma 1.1
$[a]_{n}=[r]_{n}$


This Lemma tells us that
$$
\mathbb{Z}_{n}=\{ [0]_{n},\, [1]_{n},\, [2]_{n},\,\dots,\,[n-1]_{n} \}
$$
In particular
$$
|\mathbb{Z}_{n}|=n
$$
### Definition 1.3
We define addition on $\mathbb{Z}_{n}$ and multiplication on $\mathbb{Z}_{n}$.
Addition:
$$
\begin{align}
 [a]_{n}+[b]_{n} & =[a+b]_{n} 
 \end{align}
$$
Multiplication:
$$
[a]_{n}\cdot [b]_{n}=[ab]_{n}
$$

### Example:
In ${} \mathbb{Z}_{3} {}$
$$
\begin{align}
 [0]_{3}+[1]_{3} & =[1]_{n}   \\
[1]_{3}+[2]_{3} & =[3]_{3}=[0]_{3}
 \end{align}
$$
We have a potential issue:
$$
[0]_{3}=[3]_{3}=[-3]_{3}=\dots
$$
and
$$
[1]_{3}=[4]_{3}=[-2]_{3}=\dots
$$
and so on. We need, for example
$$
\begin{align}
 [0]_{3}+[1]_{3} & =[3]_{3}+[4]_{3}  \\
  & =[6]_{3}+[-2]_{3}
 \end{align}
$$
etc.

Formally, we want the operations to be well-defined. 
Fortunately, we've already taken care of this problem. 

### Proposition 1.4
If ${} [a]_{n}=[b]_{n} {}$ and $[c]_{n}=[d]_{n}$ then
$$
\begin{align}
[a+c]_{n} & =[b+d]_{n} \\
[ac]_{n} & =[bd]_{n}
\end{align}
$$
#### Proof:
We showed last lecture that if ${} a\equiv b\:(\mathrm{mod}\  n)  {}$ and ${} c\equiv d\:(\mathrm{mod}\  n)  {}$
then
$$
\begin{align}
a+c & \equiv b+d\:(\mathrm{mod}\  n)  \\
ac & =bd\:(\mathrm{mod}\  n) 
\end{align}
$$
and by lemma 1.1, we have the proposition immediately. 

# Groups
## Finally
### Definition 2.1: Group Axioms
Let $G$ be a set with a binary operation $*$. Then we say ${} (G, *) {}$ is a group if 
1. $*$ must be associative
2. There exists a ${} e \in  G {}$ such that ${} e*g=g=g*e,\quad\forall g\in G {}$
3. For each ${} g\in G {}$, there exists $h\in G$ such that ${} g*h=h*g=e {}$

Note that $e$ is called the identity element (in a lot of Europe, its called the neutral element), and $h$ is called an inverse of $g$. 

### Examples:
1. ${} (\mathbb{Z},\, +) {}$
- We know that ${} +$ is associative
- We know ${} 0+n=n+0=n {}$ for all $n \in \mathbb{Z} {}$
- For some ${} n \in\mathbb{Z} {}$ ${} (-n)+n=n+(-n)=0 {}$. Therefore, $-n {}$ is an inverse of $n$

### Non-examples
1. $(\mathbb{Z}, \cdot )$
- $\cdot$ is associative
- ${} 1\cdot n=n\cdot 1=n {}$ is an identity element
- BUUUT, we don't have inverses. Note that, for example, $5$ does not have an inverse in $\mathbb{Z}$, and $0$ *never* has an inverse no matter what your set. 

Therefore, $\mathbb{Z}$ is not a group under multiplication