---
tags:
  - chapter
  - geotop1
date: 2024-09-23
---
[[Directory]], [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Geometric Topology 1/Geometric Topology 1|Subject Directory]]
[[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Geometric Topology 1/Lectures/1. Introduction|🞀🞀]] [[|◀]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Geometric Topology 1/Lectures/2. |▶]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Geometric Topology 1/Lectures/22. |🞂🞂]]
# Geometric Topology
## Topological Concepts
### Definition 1.1: Topological Space
A topological space consists of a set ${} X {}$ together with a distinguished collection ${} \mathcal{T} {}$ of open subsets of ${} X {}$ which are defined to be open. To be a topology, ${} \mathcal{T} {}$ must follow
- ${} \varnothing,\,X \in\mathcal{T} {}$
- ${} V,\,W \in \mathcal{T} \Rightarrow V \cap W \in \mathcal{ T} {}$
- ${} V_{\alpha} \in \mathcal{T} \Rightarrow \bigcup_{\alpha} V_{\alpha} \in \mathcal{T} {}$
We say that ${} A \subseteq X {}$ is closed iff ${} X-A {}$ is open. 

If ${} X= \mathbb{R}^{n} {}$ or a metric space, these notions coincide with the usual ones with ${} \varepsilon,\,\delta {}$
### Definition 1.2: Continuity
A map ${} f:X\to{}Y {}$ is *continuous* iff ${} W \subseteq Y {}$ is open in $Y {}$ implies that ${} f^{-1}(W) \subseteq X {}$ is open in ${} X {}$.
### Definition 1.3: Homeomorphisms
${} f:X\to{}Y {}$ a *homeomorphism* if $f {}$ is bijective, $f {}$ is continuous, and ${} f^{-1} {}$ is continuous.

The existence of such a map $f {}$ means that ${} X {}$ and $Y {}$ are essentially the same topological space.
#### Example
Consider ${} f:[0,\,2\pi) \to{} S^{1} {}$ defined by ${} f(t)=(\cos t, \sin t) {}$ (${} S^{1} {}$ is the circle in the x-y plane). It is clear that ${} f {}$ is continuous and is a bijection, but note that it's inverse ${} f^{-1} {}$ is not continuous. Therefore, $f {}$ is not a homeomorphism.
## New topological spaces from old
### Definition 2.1: Subspace Topology
Let ${} X {}$ be a topological space with topology ${} \mathcal{T} {}$, and let ${} S \subseteq X {}$. Now $S {}$ is a topological space under ${} \mathcal{U}=\{ S \cap T \mid T \in \mathcal{T} \} {}$.

A good example of this would be ${} S^{n} {}$.
### Definition 2.2: Quotient Topology
Let $X {}$ be a topological space under $\mathcal{T} {}$, and let $\sim {}$ be an equivelence relation on $X {}$. Let $Q {}$ be the set of e