---
tags:
  - chapter
  - geotop1
date: 2024-10-10
---
[[Directory]], [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Geometric Topology 1/Geometric Topology 1|Subject Directory]]
[[1. Review of topology and intro to knots|🞀🞀]] [[5. Determinant and Chessboarding|◀]] [[7. Kauffman Bracket and Jones Polynomial|▶]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Geometric Topology 1/Lectures/22. |🞂🞂]]
# Colouring
Let $L$ be a knot (or link). Represent $L$ by a diagram $D$ with $c$ crossings, and $c$ arcs (this only fails when you have a closed arc, and may be simply fixed by an R2 move), and get a matrix
$$
A_{+} \in \mathbb{Z}^{c,\, c}
$$
We then modify $A_{+}$ using chess signs to make a zero sum matrix. Now
### Proposition 1.1:
If we delete any row and any column of ${} A_{+} {}$ to get $A$ and set ${} \Delta=|\det  A| {}$, then $\Delta$ does not depend on the choice of which row and column is being deleted. 
#### Note:
By construction, ${} \det  A_{+}=0 {}$
### Lemma 1.2: Smith Normal Form
Let ${} A \in \mathbb{Z}^{m,\, m} {}$. Then there exist ${} P,\, Q \in \mathbb{Z}^{m,\, m} {}$ with ${} \det  P=\det  Q=1 {}$ such that
$$
PAQ= \begin{pmatrix}
d_{1} & 0 & \dots  & 0 \\
0 & d_{2}  & \dots  & 0 \\
\vdots  & \vdots  & \ddots  & \vdots  \\
0 & 0 & \dots  & d_{m}
\end{pmatrix}
$$
and in particular, ${} D=PAQ {}$ has ${} \det  D=\det  A {}$, and we may consider a equivalence relation that gives $A\sim D {}$. 

Proof is not given as it is a standard result. 
#### Example:
Let ${} G=\begin{pmatrix}-2 & 1 \\ 1 & -5 \end{pmatrix}  {}$. Then ${} \det  G=9 {}$, and
$$
\begin{pmatrix}0 & 1 \\ -1 & -2 \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix}-2 & 1 \\ 1 & -5 \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix}1 & 5 \\ 0 &  1\end{pmatrix} =\begin{pmatrix}1 & 0 \\ 0 & 9 \end{pmatrix} 
$$
### Theorem 1.3: Colouring Theorem
 A link $L$ is $n {}$-colourable iff ${} \gcd(n,\, \Delta)>1 {}$. In particular, $L$ is ${} n {}$-colourable for all $n {}$ iff ${} \Delta=0 {}$ (this is impossible for a knot, as no knot is $2 {}$-colourable). On the other hand, $L {}$ is                    ${} n$-colourable for no $n\geq 2$ iff ${} \Delta=1 {}$. This is the case for the unknot.
#### Proof:
If $L$ is $n$-colourable, then we want to find ${} x_{1},\,\dots,\,x_{c} \in \mathbb{Z} {}$ with 
$$
A_{+} \begin{pmatrix} x_{1} \\ \vdots  \\ x_{c} \end{pmatrix} =\begin{pmatrix} 0 \\ \vdots  \\ 0 \end{pmatrix} \:(\mathrm{mod}\  n) 
$$
with not all ${} x_{i} {}$ equal. We may let ${} x_{c}=0 {}$. Let $A$ be $A_{+} {}$ with the last row and column deleted. We want to show that ${} A\mathbf{x}=\mathbf{0}\:(\mathrm{mod}\  n)  {}$ with ${} \mathbf{x}=\begin{pmatrix} x_{1} \\ \vdots  \\ x_{c-1} \end{pmatrix}  {}$. By the smith normal form, we have ${} P,\, Q \in \mathbb{Z}^{c-1,\, c-1} {}$ with $D=PAQ {}$ with $D$ diagonal. Then
$$
P^{-1}D Q^{-1}\mathbf{x}=\mathbf{0} \:(\mathrm{mod}\  n) 
$$
and since $P$ and $Q {}$ are invertible, then we have a vector $\mathbf{y} {}$ with
$$
D \mathbf{y}=\mathbf{0} \:(\mathrm{mod}\  n ) 
$$
Now if ${} \Delta=0 {}$, then ${} d_{1}d_{2}\dots d_{c-1}=0 {}$, and so we may assume that ${} d_{1}=0 {}$. Now if we let ${} y_{i}=1 {}$ if ${} i=1 {}$ and ${} y_{i}=0 {}$ if ${} i>1 {}$. Then this is a valid solution to the equation. Conversely, it is clear that if there exists a $\mathbf{y} {}$ such that ${} D\mathbf{y}=\mathbf{0} \:(\mathrm{mod}\  n)  {}$ for all $n$, then ${} \det  D=0 {}$.
