---
tags:
  - chapter
  - ttao_analysis1
date: 2023-10-21
---
[[Directory]], [[T. Tao Analysis 1|Subject Directory]]
# The Peano Axioms
### Definition 1.1 (Informal)
A natural number is any element of the set
$$
\mathbb{N}:=\{ 0,\, 1,\, 2,\, 3,\, 4\dots \}
$$
Which is the set created by starting with $0$ and then counting forward forever. 

This definition isn't really satisfactory. For example, how do we know that we won't end up back at $0$? How do we "count forward"? What even is a set, and what does being an element of one entail? How can we define the operations on this set?

A better way is to start with $0$, and the *increment operation*. We will denote this with $n{+}{+}$. For instance, ${} 3{+}{+}=4$, ${} (3{+}{+}){+}{+}=5 {}$, etc. 
## The Axioms
### Axiom 1
$0$ is a natural number
### Axiom 2
If $n$ is a natural number, then $n{+}{+}$ is also a natural number
### Definition 1.2
We define $0$ to be $0$, $1$ to be $0{+}{+}1$, $2$ to be the number ${} (0{+}{+}){+}{+}$, etc. This is for convenience, as otherwise the notation is cumbersome. 

These Axioms are not sufficient, however. Consider, for example, a number system where ${} 3{+}{+}=0 {}$. This would also fulfil these axioms, but is not our conception of the natural numbers. To prevent this, we introduce a ${} 3^{\mathrm{rd}} {}$ axiom:

### Axiom 3
${} 0 {}$ is not the successor of any natural number, i.e. for all natural numbers $n$, we have $n{+}{+}\neq 0$

However, we still have problems. Consider, for example, a number system where ${} 4{+}{+}=4 {}$, or ${} 2{+}{+}=1 {}$. These are both permissible in our axioms so far, but again are not our conception of the natural numbers. So, we Introduce a $4^{\text{th}}$ axiom:

### Axiom 4
Different natural numbers have different successors, that is, let ${} m,\, n {}$ be natural numbers with $m\neq n$. Then we must have $m{+}{+}\neq n{+}{+}$. Equivalently, if ${} n{+}{+}=m{+}{+}$, then ${} n=m {}$. 

Finally, we have one last problem. We may have "natural numbers" which are "unreachable". For example, what if we had ${} 0.5 {}$ as a natural number, and ${} 1.5=0.5{+}{+}$, and so on. These are unreachable from the naturals we have defined thus far, and yet a set containing them would still satisfy our axioms. So, we introduce one last axiom:

### Axiom 5
Let $P(n)$ be any property of the natural numbers, that is a function ${} P:\mathbb{N}\to{}\{ \bot,\, \top \}$. Suppose ${} P(0)$ is true, and suppose we have the implication ${} P(n)=\top\Rightarrow P(n{+}{+})=\top {}$. Then, by axiom, we have ${} P(n)$ is true for all natural numbers $n$. This is called the principle of mathematical induction.

These axioms are sufficient to define a set with the desired behaviour. We call this set $\mathbb{N} {}$, and won't worry about the names of the elements. All we care about is their behaviour. 

In full, and in more formal Language we have
### Axiom 1
${} 0\in \mathbb{N} {}$ 
### Axiom 2
If ${} n\in \mathbb{N} {}$, then ${} n{+}{+}\in \mathbb{N} {}$
### Axiom 3
For all $n \in\mathbb{N} {}$, $n{+}{+}\neq 0 {}$.
### Axiom 4
For all ${} n,\, m \in \mathbb{N} {}$, if ${} n{+}{+}=m{+}{+} {}$ then $n=m {}$
### Axiom 5
Let ${} P:\mathbb{N}\to{}\{ \bot,\,\top \} {}$ be a statement on the natural numbers. If ${} P(0)=\top$, and if for all ${} n \in\mathbb{N} {}$, $P(n)=\top\Rightarrow P(n+1)=\top$, then ${} P(n)=\top$ for all $n \in\mathbb{N} {}$.
### Proposition 1.3: Recursive Definitions
Suppose we have for all ${} n \in\mathbb{N}$, some functions ${} f_{n}:\mathbb{N}\to{}\mathbb{N} {}$. Let ${} c\in \mathbb{N} {}$. Then, for each  Natural number $n {}$, we can assign a unique natural number ${} a_{n} {}$, with ${} a_{0}=c {}$ as the initial term, and $a_{n{+}{+}}=f_{n}(a_{n})$

#### Proof:
We work by induction. Note that, by the axioms above, $a_{0}$ will never change, as that would require ${} 0=n{+}{+}$ for some $n \in\mathbb{N} {}$. Now suppose that this procedure also assigns a single number to ${} a_{n}$. Then again, it must also assign a single value to ${} a_{n{+}{+}}$, as it the value was not unique, then we would have ${} n{+}{+}=k{+}{+} {}$ for some $n\neq k$, ${} n,\, k\in \mathbb{N} {}$. Therefore, by the induction principle, every value defined in this recursion is unique.

## Exercises 2.1
N/A
# Addition
### Definition 2.1
Let ${} m {}$ be a natural number. We define ${} 0+m:=m {}$, where $+ {}$ is an infix operator function (${} +:\mathbb{N}\times \mathbb{N}\to{}\mathbb{N} {}$, with ${} n+m=+(n,\, m)$) We then define $$(n{+}{+})+m=(n+m){+}{+} {}$$Therefore, by Proposition 1.3, addition is defined for all ${} n,\, m \in \mathbb{N} {}$.

## Useful addition Lemmas
### Lemma 2.2: Identity
For all $n \in\mathbb{N} {}$, we have $n+0=n {}$
#### Proof: 
We work by induction. We have the base case ${} 0+0=0 {}$, as ${} 0+m=m {}$ by definition. Suppose inductively, we have ${} n+0=n {}$. Then we have 
$$
\begin{align}
(n{+}{+})+0 & =(n+0){+}{+}  &  & \text{ by 2.1}\\
 & =n{+}{+} &  & \text{ by hypothesis}
\end{align}
$$
By hypothesis. Therefore, by the induction principle, we have that ${} m+0=m$ for all $m \in  \mathbb{N} {}$.
### Lemma 2.3: Slight Commutativity
For all ${} n,\, m \in \mathbb{N} {}$, we have $n+(m{+}{+})=(n+m){+}{+}$
#### Proof:
We work by induction on $n$, holding $m$ fixed. For the base case when ${} n=0 {}$, then we have
$$
0+(m{+}{+})=m{+}{+}=(0+m){+}{+}
$$
Now suppose inductively that ${} n+(m{+}{+})=(n+m){+}{+} {}$. Then we have 
$$
\begin{align}
(n{+}{+})+(m{+}{+}) & =(n+(m{+}{+})){+}{+}  &  & \text{ by 2.1}\\
 & =((n+m){+}{+}){+}{+}  &  & \text{ by hypothesis}\\
 & =((n{+}{+})+m){+}{+}  &  & \text{ by 2.1}
\end{align}
$$
Therefore, by the induction principle, we have that ${} n+(m{+}{+})=(n+m){+}{+}$.
### Proposition 2.4: Commutativity of Addition
For all ${} n,\, m \in \mathbb{N} {}$, we have $n+m=m+n$
#### Proof:
We work by induction on $n$, holding $m$ fixed. First, we prove the base case: 
$$
\begin{align}
 0+m & =m  &  & \text{ by 2.1} \\
	 & = m+0  &  & \text{ by 2.2}
 \end{align}
$$
Suppose inductively we have ${} n+m=m+n {}$. Then we have
$$
\begin{align}
(n{+}{+})+m & =(n+m){+}{+} &  & \text{ by 2.1} \\
 & =(m+n){+}{+} &  & \text{ by hypothesis} \\
 & =m+(n{+}{+}) &  & \text{ by 2.3}
\end{align}
$$
### Proposition 2.5: Addition is Associative
For all $a,\, b,\, c \in \mathbb{N} {}$, we have 
$$
a+(b+c)=(a+b)+c
$$
#### Proof:
Suppose that ${} a,\, b,\, c\in \mathbb{N} {}$. We induct on $a$, fixing $b$ and $c$. First, the base case: if ${} a=0 {}$, then we have
$$
\begin{align}
a+(b+c) & =0+(b+c) \\
 & =b+c & & \text{ by 2.1} \\
 & =(0+b)+c &  & \text{ by 2.1}
\end{align}
$$
Now suppose by induction that ${} a+(b+c)=(a+b)+c {}$. Then we have
$$
\begin{align}
(a{+}{+})+(b+c) & =(a+(b+c)){+}{+} &  & \text{ by 2.1} \\
 & =((a+b)+c){+}{+} &  & \text{ by hypothesis} \\
 & =((a+b){+}{+})+c &  & \text{ by 2.1} \\
 & =((a{+}{+})+b)+c &  & \text{ by 2.1}
\end{align}
$$
Therefore, by the induction principle, we have that ${} a+(b+c)=(a+b)+c {}$ for all ${} a,\, b,\, c\in \mathbb{N} {}$.
### Proposition 2.6: Addition Cancellation Law
Let ${} a,\, b,\, c\in \mathbb{N} {}$ such that ${} a+b=a+c {}$. Then we have ${} b=c {}$.
#### Proof:
We work by induction on ${} a$. First, the base case when $a=0$. Then we have ${} 0+b=0+c {}$, which, by ${} 2.1 {}$, implies ${} b=c {}$. Next, suppose inductively, that $a+b=a+c\Rightarrow b=c$. Then we have
$$
\begin{align}
(a{+}{+})+b & =(a{+}{+})+c \\
(a+b){+}{+} & =(a+c){+}{+}  &  & \text{ by 2.1} \\
\Rightarrow \quad a+b & =a+c &  & \text{ by Axiom }4 \\
\Rightarrow \quad \phantom{a+{}}b & =c &  & \text{ by hypothesis}
\end{align}
$$
Therefore, by the induction principle, we have that for all ${} a,\, b,\, c \in \mathbb{N} {}$, we have ${} a+b=a+c\Rightarrow b=c, {}$ as required
### Definition 2.7: Positive Natural Numbers
A natural number is positive if and only if it is not equal to 0
### Proposition 2.8: Addition Preserves Positivity
If ${} a$ is a *positive* natural number, and $b$ is a natural number, then $a+b {}$ is positive
#### Proof:
We work by induction on ${} b$. If ${} b=0 {}$, then we have ${} a+b=a+0=a {}$, which is positive by hypothesis. Now suppose inductively that $a+b\neq 0 {}$, so $a+b {}$ is positive. Now we have
$$
\begin{align}
a+(b{+}{+}) & =(a+b){+}{+}  &  & \text{ by 2.3} \\
 & \neq 0 &  & \text{  by Axiom 3}
\end{align}
$$
Therefore, by the induction principle, we have that ${} a+b$ is positive for all ${} a,\, b \in \mathbb{N} {}$ with $a {}$ positive, as required.
### Corollary 2.9: Only $0 {}$ adds to $0 {}$
Let ${} a,\, b \in \mathbb{N} {}$ such that ${} a+b=0 {}$. Then ${} a=b=0 {}$. 
### Proof:
We work by way of contradiction. Suppose that ${} a\neq 0 {}$, or $b\neq 0$. If $a\neq 0$, then by $2.8$, ${} a+b\neq 0 {}$. This is a contradiction, so therefore, ${} b\neq 0$. But by ${} 2.4 {}$, ${} a+b=b+a {}$ and by ${} 2.8$, $b+a\neq 0\neq a+b {}$. This is again a contradiction. Therefore, we have that both ${} a=b=0 {}$, as required.
### Lemma 2.10: Injectivity of ${+}{+} {}$
Let ${} a\in \mathbb{N} {}$ be positive. Then, there exists a unique $b\in \mathbb{N} {}$ such that ${} b{+}{+}=a {}$.
### Proof:
We work by induction on $a$. Base case: if $a=1$, then suppose that ${} b{+}{+}=1$. Note that ${} 1=0{+}{+}. {}$ Therefore, by Axiom 4, we have $b=0$. Therefore, there exists a unique $b$ such that ${} b{+}{+}=a {}$.

Now suppose we have for some ${} a \in \mathbb{N} {}$, we have a unique ${} b\in \mathbb{N} {}$ such that ${} a=b{+}{+} {}$. Now we have $a{+}{+}=a{+}{+} {}$, as ${} a\in \mathbb{N} {}$. Suppose we also have ${} a{+}{+}=c{+}{+} {}$ for some ${} c \in  \mathbb{N}$. Then by Axiom 4, we have $a=c {}$, so $a {}$ is unique. Therefore, by the induction hypothesis, for all positive ${} a \in  \mathbb{N} {}$, we have a ${} b\in \mathbb{N} {}$ such that ${} a=b{+}{+} {}$.
### Definition 2.11: Ordering of the Naturals
Let ${} n,\, m \in  \mathbb{N} {}$. We say that $n$ is greater than or equal to ${} m$, writing $n\geq m$, or $m\leq n$, iff we have ${} n=m+a {}$ for some ${} a \in \mathbb{N} {}$.

We say that ${} n$ is greater than $m$ or $n {}$ is *strictly* greater than $m$, writing $n>m$ or $m<n {}$, iff $n\geq m$ and $n\neq m {}$.

We may also say that ${} n$ is less than or equal to $m$ if $n\leq m {}$, ${} m\geq n {}$, and $n$ is less than $m$ or $n$ is *strictly* less than $m$ if $n<m$, $m>n$.
### Proposition 2.12: Basic Properties of Order
1. $a\geq a$ (reflexivity of order)
2. If $a\geq b$ and $b\geq c$, then $a\geq c$ (transitivity of order)
3. If $a\geq b$ and $b\geq a {}$ then $a=b$ (antisymmetry of order)
4. $a\geq b$ if and only if $a+c\geq b+c {}$
5. ${} a<b {}$ if and only if ${} b=a+x {}$ for some *positive* ${} x\in \mathbb{N} {}$
6. $a<b {}$ if and only if $a{+}{+}\leq b {}$
#### Proof:
1. Let ${} a\in \mathbb{N} {}$. Then we have ${} a=a+0 {}$ by ${} 2.2 {}$, and ${} 0\in \mathbb{N} {}$ by Axiom 1. Therefore, by ${} 2.11 {}$, we have $a\geq a$
2. Let $a,\, b,\, c\in \mathbb{N} {}$ such that $a\geq b$ and $b\geq c {}$. Then, by ${} 2.11 {}$, we have ${} x,\, y \in  \mathbb{N}$ such that ${} a=b+x {}$ and ${} b=c+y {}$. Substituting, we have ${} a=c+x+y=c+(x+y) {}$, and ${} x+y\in \mathbb{N} {}$ by ${} 2.1 {}$, so we have ${} a\geq c$ by $2.11$.
3. Let $a,\, b\in \mathbb{N}$ such that $a\geq b$ and $b\geq a {}$. Then, by ${} 2.11 {}$ we have $x,\, y \in \mathbb{N}$ such that ${} a=b+x {}$ and ${} b=a+y {}$. Substituting, we have ${} a=a+x+y {}$, so by ${} 2.6 {}$ we have ${} x+y=0 {}$. Therefore, by ${} 2.9$, we have ${} x=y=0$, and so, ${} a=b+y=b+0=b {}$ by $2.2$.
4. Working $(\Rightarrow )$. Let $a,\, b\in \mathbb{N}$ such that $a\geq b$. Now let ${} c \in \mathbb{N} {}$. By ${} 2.11 {}$, we have $x \in \mathbb{N}$ such that ${} a=b+x {}$. By ${} 2.6 {}$, we have $a+c=b+c+x=(b+c)+x$. Therefore, by ${} 2.11 {}$, $a+c\geq b+c {}$
	Now working $(\Leftarrow )$. Let $a,\, b,\, c\in \mathbb{N}$ such that ${} a+c\geq b+c {}$. Then by ${} 2.11 {}$, there exists $x \in \mathbb{N} {}$ such that $a+c=(b+c)+x=b+c+x$, by ${} 2.5$. Then, by ${} 2.6 {}$, we have ${} a=b+x {}$, so by ${} 2.11 {}$, we have $a\geq b {}$.
	Therefore ${} a\geq b$ iff ${} a+c\geq b+c {}$, for all $a,\, b,\, c \in \mathbb{N} {}$.
5. Working $(\Rightarrow ) {}$. Suppose we have ${} a,\, b\in \mathbb{N} {}$ such that ${} a<b {}$. By ${} 2.11 {}$, we have some $x \in \mathbb{N} {}$ such that ${} b=a+x {}$, and that $b\neq a {}$. Suppose that ${} x=0 {}$. Therefore, we have ${} b=a+x=a+0=a, {}$ by $2.2 {}$. However, we assumed that $b\neq a {}$. This is a contradiction, therefore, ${} x\neq 0$, and so $x {}$ is positive. 

	Working ${} (\Leftarrow ) {}$. Suppose we have ${} a,\, b,\, x \in \mathbb{N} {}$ with $x {}$ positive such that ${} b=a+x {}$. Therefore, we have $b\geq a {}$ by ${} 2.11 {}$. Suppose we have ${} b=a {}$. Then we would have
$$
\begin{align}
b & =a+x \\
a & =a+x \\
x & =0  &  & \text{ by 2.6}
\end{align}
$$
	However, we assumed that ${} x {}$ is positive, so this is a contradiction. Therefore, ${} b\neq a {}$, and so ${} b>a {}$.
	Therefore, ${} a<b {}$ iff there exists a positive ${} x \in \mathbb{N} {}$ such that $b=a+x {}$.
6. Working ${} (\Rightarrow )$. Suppose we have ${} a,\, b\in \mathbb{N} {}$ such that $a<b {}$. By ${} 2.12.5 {}$, there exists some positive ${} x \in \mathbb{N}$ such that ${} b=a+x$. Since $x {}$ is positive, then by ${} 2.10 {}$, we have some ${} y \in \mathbb{N}$ such that ${} x=y{+}{+}$. Now we have 
$$
\begin{align}
b & =a+x \\
 & =a+(y{+}{+}) \\
 & =(a+y){+}{+}  &  &  \text{ by 2.3} \\
 & =(a{+}{+})+y &  & \text{ by 2.1} \\
\end{align}
$$
	Therefore, by ${} 2.11 {}$, we have $b\geq a{+}{+} {}$.
	. 
	Working ${} (\Leftarrow ) {}$. Suppose we have ${} a,\, b\in \mathbb{N} {}$ such that $a{+}{+}\leq b {}$. By ${} 2.11 {}$, we have some ${} x \in \mathbb{N} {}$ such that
$$
\begin{align}
b & =(a{+}{+})+x \\
 & =(a+x){+}{+} &  & \text{ by 2.1} \\
 & =a+(x{+}{+}) &  & \text{ by 2.3} \\
\end{align}
$$
	By Axiom 3, we have ${} x{+}{+}\neq 0$, so $x{+}{+}$ is positive. Therefore, by ${} 2.12.5 {}$, we have $b>a {}$.
	Therefore, ${} a<b$ iff ${} a{+}{+}\leq b {}$.
### Proposition 2.13: Trichotomy of Order
Let ${} a,\, b\in \mathbb{N} {}$. Then exactly one of the following is true:
- $a=b$
- $a>b$
- $a<b$
#### Proof:
First we show that at most 1 of the statements hold. Let $a,\, b \in \mathbb{N}$. If $a<b {}$ or $a>b {}$, the $a\neq 0$ by ${} 2.11 {}$. Now suppose we have ${} a<b$ and $b>a {}$, then by ${} 2.11 {}$ we have $a\leq b {}$ and $b\geq a$. By ${} 2.12.3 {}$, we then have ${} a=b {}$. This is a contradiction, as $a\neq b$. Therefore, at most 1 statement holds.

Next we show that at least 1 statement is true. We induct on $a$, keeping $b {}$ fixed. For the base case, when ${} a=0 {}$, then by ${} 2.1 {}$, we have ${} b=0+b$. Since ${} b\in \mathbb{N} {}$, then we have $b\geq 0$. We now have 2 cases: if ${} b=0 {}$, then $b=a$. Otherwise, $b\neq 0$, and so ${} b>0=a {}$. Therefore, the base case holds.

Now suppose the trichotomy holds for $a {}$. Then we have 3 cases:

Case 1: $a>b$. Then, by ${} 2.12.5 {}$, we have some positive ${} x \in \mathbb{N}$ such that $a=b+x$. Therefore, we have 
$$
\begin{align}
a & =b+x \\
	a{+}{+} & =(b+x){+}{+} \\
a{+}{+} & =b+(x{+}{+})
\end{align}
$$
Since ${} x {}$ is positive, then $x{+}{+}$ is positive by, $2.8$. Therefore, $a{+}{+}>b$, by $2.12.5 {}$.

Case 2: ${} a=b {}$. Then we have ${} a{+}{+}=a+1=b+1 {}$. Therefore, since $1 {}$ is positive, we have ${} a{+}{+}>b {}$ by ${} 2.12.5 {}$. 

Case 3: $a<b {}$. By ${} 2.12.6 {}$, we have $a{+}{+}\leq b$. Therefore, if ${} a{+}{+}=b {}$, then ${} a{+}{+}=b {}$. Otherwise, $a{+}{+}\neq b$, and so by ${} 2.11 {}$, we have $a{+}{+}<b$.
Therefore, by the induction principle, we have that for all ${} a,\, b\in \mathbb{N}$, either ${} a<b {}$ or ${} a=b {}$ or ${} a>b. {}$
### Proposition 2.14: Strong Induction
Let $m_{0}\in \mathbb{N}$, and let ${} P:\mathbb{N}\to{}\{ \bot, \top \} {}$ be a statement on the natural numbers. Suppose that for all $m\in \mathbb{N} {}$, with ${} m\geq m_{0} {}$, we have:
If ${} \forall m'\in \mathbb{N} {}$ such that $m>m'\geq m_{0}$, we have ${} P(m')=\top$, then ${} P(m)=\top {}$
Then we have that ${} P(m)=\top {}$ for all $m\geq m_{0}$.

In particular, note that when ${} m=m_{0} {}$, then the left hand side is vacuous, and so ${} P(m_{0})$ must also hold. 
#### Proof:
- this is also an exercise, tao really likes to make you work lmao
## Exercises 2.2
[[Exercises 2.2]]
