---
tags:
  - exercises
  - grillet_abstract_alg
date:
count: 11
---
[[Directory]], [[Grillet Abstract Algebra]]
[[2.2. The Krull-Schmidt Theorem Exercises.md|Last]] ;; [[2.4. Symmetric Groups Exercises.md|Next]]
[[Abstract Algebra - P. A. Grillet.pdf#page=68|Exercise Sheet]]
11. 
Let $G$ be a group with ${} |G|=n {}$, and let ${} g \in G {}$ with ${} |g|=k {}$. Note that the minimum size of the centraliser may be $k$, as $g$ commutes with ${} g^{m}$ for all $m$. Therefore, the maximum size of it's conjugacy class is the index of the centraliser, ${} n /k {}$. 
12. 
Let $G$ such that $G/Z(G) {}$ is cyclic. Then there exists some element ${} a \in G {}$ so that we have ${} G / Z(G)=\langle aZ(G) \rangle  {}$. Let ${} Z=Z(G) {}$, and let ${} x \in G {}$. Now ${} x \in a^{k}Z {}$, so, ${} x=a^{k}y=ya^{k} {}$ for some ${} y \in Z {}$. Therefore, ${} ax=a^{k+1}y=ya^{k+1}=xa {}$, and so ${} a \in Z {}$, so ${} \langle aZ \rangle =\langle Z \rangle =1 {}$, and ${} G/Z(G)=1 {}$, so ${} G = Z(G) {}$ and $G$ is abelian.
13. 
Let $\alpha:G\to{}G {}$ be an automorphism of $G$. Let ${} x \in Z(G) {}$, and let ${} y \in G {}$. Now there exists some ${} b \in G {}$ such that ${} \alpha(b)=y {}$, so ${} y\alpha(x)=\alpha(b)\alpha(x)=\alpha(bx)=\alpha(xb)=\alpha(x)y {}$, and ${} \alpha(x) \in Z(G) {}$. Therefore, ${} Z(G) {}$ is a characteristic subgroup.
14. 
Let $G$ be a group, and let $N\trianglelefteq G$, and let $A\leq N$ be a characteristic subgroup of $N$. Now let ${} g \in G$. Note that the inner automorphism ${} \alpha(x)=gxg^{-1} {}$ induces an automorphism of ${} N {}$ by restriction, since ${} N$ is normal. Therefore, $A$ is fixed under $\alpha$, and $\alpha(A)=A {}$, so $A$ is normal. 

Furthermore, suppose $N {}$ is a characteristic subgroup of ${} G {}$. Now let ${} \alpha {}$ be an automorphism of $G$. Then $\alpha$ induces an automorphism of $N$ by restriction, so $\alpha(A)=A {}$. Therefore, $A$ is a characteristic subgroup.
15. 
Let $\alpha$ be an automorphism of $G$. Then $\alpha$ induces an automorphism ${} \bar{\alpha} {}$ in ${} G /N {}$ defined by ${} \alpha(xN)=\alpha(x)N {}$. This is well defined since $N$ is fixed under $\alpha$. Now $\bar{\alpha} {}$ fixes ${} K /N {}$. Therefore, if ${} k \in K {}$, then ${} \bar{\alpha}(kN)=\alpha(k)N=\ell N {}$ for some ${} \ell \in K {}$. Therefore, ${} \alpha(k)=\ell n {}$, for some ${} n \in N {}$, so ${} \alpha(k) \in K {}$ since ${} n \in K {}$.

