---
tags:
  - chapter
  - numtheory1
date: 2024-10-25
completed: true
---
[[Directory]], [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Introduction to Number Theory 1/Introduction to Number Theory 1|Subject Directory]]
[[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Introduction to Number Theory 1/Lectures/1. Introduction|🞀🞀]] [[9. Didn't Happen|◀]] [[11. Primitive Roots in Prime Powers, and Quadratic Residues|▶]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Introduction to Number Theory 1/Lectures/22. |🞂🞂]]
## Primitive Roots 
#### Example:
${} 4 {}$ is not a PR ${} \:(\mathrm{mod}\  m)  {}$, for $m\geq 3 {}$. Assume that $m {}$ is odd. We know that ${} \phi(m)$ is even for ${} m \geq 3 {}$, and so then
$$
4^{\phi (m)/2}=2^{\phi(m)}\equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  m) 
$$
and ${} \phi(m) /2 < \phi(m) {}$, and $4 {}$ is not primitive. 
### Conjecture (Artin)
2 is a PR ${} \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p)  {}$ for infinitely many primes
### Question:
For which ${} m \in \mathbb{N} {}$ is ${} \mathbb{Z}_{m}^{\times } {}$ cyclic?

We saw that ${} \mathbb{Z}_{p}^{\times } {}$ is cyclic, but ${} \mathbb{Z}_{8}^{\times } {}$ is not cyclic
#### Example:
We show that ${} \mathbb{Z}^{\times }_{15} {}$ is not cyclic. Note that ${} \phi(15)=2\cdot 4=8 {}$.

Observe for ${} a \in \mathbb{N} {}$, with ${} \gcd(a,\, 15)=1 {}$ iff ${} \gcd(a,\, 3)=1 {}$ and ${} \gcd(a,\, 5)=1 {}$.

The Euler-Fermat Theorem says that ${} a^{2}\equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  3)  {}$ and ${} a^{4}\equiv 1\:(\mathrm{mod}\  5)  {}$. Therefore, due to CRT, we have that
$$
a^{4}\equiv 1\:(\mathrm{mod}\  15) 
$$
and so the order of every element of ${} \mathbb{Z}_{15}^{\times } {}$ divides $4<8 {}$, so there are no primitive roots. 
#### Remark:
Suppose that ${} m=ab {}$ with ${} ab\geq 3 {}$, and ${} \gcd(a,\, b)=1 {}$, then there are no PRs modulo $m$. 
## Applications of Primitive Roots
#### Example:
Solving
$$
x^{n}\equiv a\:(\mathrm{mod}\  p) 
$$
### Lemma 5.1: 
Let ${} a \in \mathbb{Z} {}$, ${} m \in \mathbb{N} {}$ with ${} \gcd(a,\, m)=1 {}$. Then
$$
a^{n}=1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  m) \iff o([a]_{m}) \mid n
$$
Let ${} d=o([a]_{m}) {}$. Assume that ${} a^{n}\equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  m)  {}$. Apply the division algorithm to get integers ${} r,\, q {}$ with ${} n=qd+r {}$ with $0\leq r<d {}$. 
Goal: Show ${} r=0 {}$
Note that
$$
\begin{align}
a^{n}=a^{qd+r}=(a^{d})^{q}\cdot a^{r}
\end{align}
$$
Now since ${} a^{d}\equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  m)  {}$ and ${} a^{n}\equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  m)  {}$, then
$$
1\equiv a^{n}\equiv (a^{d})^{q} \cdot a^{r}\equiv a^{r} \:(\mathrm{mod}\  m) 
$$
Now since $r<d {}$, then ${} r=0 {}$, as ${} r \mid d {}$. Therefore, ${} d \mid n {}$

Now assume that ${} d \mid n {}$. Then 
$$
a^{n}=a^{n/d \cdot d}=(a^{d})^{n/d}\equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  m) 
$$
#### Example:
Find all solutions in ${} \mathbb{Z}_{19} {}$ to ${} 4x^{5}\equiv 7 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  19)  {}$.

Step 1: Find a primitive root mod $19 {}$. We can find that $2$ is a primitive root ${} \:(\mathrm{mod}\  19)  {}$. 
Step 2: Express everything as powers of 2. In particular, 
$$
\begin{align}
 x & =2^{i} \text{ for some } i\in  \mathbb{N} \\
4 & = 2^{2} \\
7 & \equiv 2^{6}
 \end{align}
$$
and then
$$
\begin{align}
 2^{2} (2^{i})^{5} & \equiv 2^{6} \:(\mathrm{mod}\  19)  \\
2^{5i-4} & \equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\   19) 
\end{align}
$$
Step 3: Apply Lemma 5.1:
Then we want to solve 
$$
5i-4 \equiv 0 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  18) 
$$
Then ${} i\equiv 8 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  18)  {}$, and ${} x=2^{8}\equiv 9 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  19)  {}$. 
#### Example:
Find all integers $x$ with ${} 4^{x}\equiv 9 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  19)  {}$. 

Step 1: Find a PR.
- 2 is a primitive root of ${} 19 {}$
Step 2:
We have
$$
\begin{align}
4 & =2^{2} \\
9\equiv 2^{8} \:(\mathrm{mod}\  19) 
\end{align}
$$
and so we have ${} 2^{2x}=2^{8} \:(\mathrm{mod}\  19)  {}$. 
Step 3:
Then we have ${} 2x\equiv 8 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  18)  {}$. Then ${} x\equiv 4\:(\mathrm{mod}\  9)  {}$. 