---
tags:
  - chapter
  - numtheory1
date: 2024-11-05
---
[[Directory]], [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Introduction to Number Theory 1/Introduction to Number Theory 1|Subject Directory]]
[[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Introduction to Number Theory 1/Lectures/1. Introduction|🞀🞀]] [[10. Applications of Primitive Roots|◀]] [[12. Euler's Criterion and Applications|▶]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Introduction to Number Theory 1/Lectures/22. |🞂🞂]]
#todo read Sections 7.1 and 7.2 as they will not be covered in lectures. They are non-examinable
## Primitive Roots to Prime Power Moduli
### Question:
For which ${} m \in \mathbb{N} {}$ is ${} \mathbb{Z}_{m}^{\times } {}$ cyclic?
### Proposition 1.1:
Let $g$ be a PR modulo $p$, with $p$ prime. Then at least one of ${} g,\, g+p {}$ is a primitive root modulo $p^{2} {}$. 
#### Proof:
Write ${} d=o([g]_{p^{2}}) {}$ and ${} e=o([g+p]_{p^{2}}) {}$. We know that ${} d \mid  \phi(p^{2}) {}$, and ${} e \mid  \phi(p^{2}) {}$. We also know that ${} g^{d}\equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p^{2})  {}$. Therefore, ${} g^{d}\equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p)  {}$. By lemma 5.1, we have that ${} o([g]_{p})=\phi(p)=p-1 {}$ is a divides ${} d {}$. 

Now ${} p-1 \mid d {}$, and ${} d \mid  p(p-1) {}$. Therefore, ${} d=\ell(p-1) {}$ with either ${} \ell=1 {}$ or ${} \ell=p {}$. Hence, ${} d=p(p-1) {}$ or ${} d=p-1 {}$. Similarly, ${} e=p(p-1) {}$ or ${} e=p-1 {}$. 

Case 1: ${} d=p(p-1) {}$
Then we are done, as ${} d=\phi(p^{2}) {}$, and $g$ is a PR modulo $p^{2} {}$.

Case 2: ${} d=p-1 {}$. 
We need to show that ${} (g+p)^{p-1}\not\equiv  1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p^{2})  {}$. Now
$$
\begin{align}
 (g+p)^{p-1} & =\sum_{j=0}^{p-1} \binom{p-1}{j} g^{p-1-j}p^{j}   \\
 & =g^{p-1}+(p-1)g^{p-2}p +p^{2}(k)
 \end{align}
$$
Therefore, 
$$
(g+p)^{p-1}\equiv g^{p-1}+(p-1)g^{p-2} p
$$
Now since ${} g^{p-1}\equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p)  {}$, then since ${} g^{p-2} \not\equiv 0 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p^{2})  {}$, since ${} \gcd(g,\, p)=1 {}$. Therefore
$$
1-pg^{p-2}\not\equiv \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p^{2}) 
$$
and so ${} e=p(p-1) {}$, and $e {}$ is a primitive root. 

#### Note: 
1. Let ${} g {}$ be a PR mod ${} p$. If ${} g^{p-1}\not\equiv 1 mop^{2} {}$, then $g$ is a PR ${} \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p^{2})  {}$. 
2. If ${} g^{p-1}\equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p^{2})  {}$, then $g+p {}$ is a PR ${} \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p^{2})  {}$. 
#### Example:
Find a PR modulo $25 {}$. First we find that $2$ is a PR modulo $5$. Next, ${} 2^{5-1}\equiv 2^{4}\equiv 16\not\equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  25)  {}$, and so $2$ is a PR modulo $25 {}$.
#### Example:
Find another PR modulo $25 {}$. Since $2$ is a PR, then $7$ is a PR modulo $5$. Now ${} 7^{4}=2401\equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  25)  {}$. Then ${} 7+5=12 {}$ is a PR modulo 25. 
### Proposition 1.2:
Let $p>2 {}$ be prime. Suppose that $g {}$ is a PR modulo $p^{2} {}$. Then $g$ is a PR modulo ${} p^{n}$ for each ${} n \geq 2 {}$.
#### Proof:
See the lecture video #todo 
#### Example:
${} 2,\, 12 {}$ are primitive roots mod ${} 5^{n} {}$ for all $n\geq 1$
#### Remark:
We know that ${} \mathbb{Z}^{\times }_{p^{n}} {}$ for $p>2 {}$, and $n\geq 1$.
#### Fact:
${} \mathbb{Z}_{m}^{\times } {}$ is cyclic iff ${} m=1,\, 2,\, 4,\, p^{n},\, 2p^{n} {}$ for primes $p>2 {}$ and $n\geq 1$. 
# Quadratic Residues
### Problem:
Given ${} b \in \mathbb{Z} {}$, determine whether ${} x^{2}\equiv b \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p)  {}$ has a solution in ${} \mathbb{Z}_{p}$. 
#### Remarks:
If ${} p \mid  b {}$, then ${} x\equiv 0\:(\mathrm{mod}\  p)  {}$ is the only solution in ${} \mathbb{Z}_{p}$. If ${} p=2 {}$ and $b$ is odd, then ${} x\equiv 1\:(\mathrm{mod}\  2)  {}$ is the only solution. This is odd, as in other primes, there are a pair of solutions $x$ and $-x {}$
### Definition 2.1:
Let $p>2 {}$ and ${} b \in \mathbb{Z} {}$ with ${} \gcd(p,\, b)=1 {}$. We say that $b$ is a *quadratic residue* modulo $p$ if ${} x^{2}\equiv b \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p)  {}$ has a solution in ${} \mathbb{Z}_{p}$. Otherwise, we say that $b$ is a quadratic non-residue modulo $p$. 
#### Notation:
We often abbreviate QR - Quadratic Residue, and QNR - Quadratic Non-Residue.
#### Remark:
$0$ is neither a QR or QNR, in our convention.
#### Example:
$2$ is a QNR modulo $3$. that is, ${} 0^{2}\equiv 0,\, 1^{2}\equiv 1,\, 2^{2}\equiv 1,\, \:(\mathrm{mod}\  3)  {}$. However, $1$ is a QR modulo $3 {}$. 

Also, ${} 2$ is a QR modulo $7$. We can see this as ${} 3^{2}\equiv 2 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  7)  {}$. 
#### Remark:
If ${} a\equiv b \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p)  {}$, then $a$ is a QR iff $b$ is a QR. 
#### Example:
Find all QR modulo $7$. We do this by trial and error:
$$
\begin{align}
1^{2} & \equiv 1 \\
 2^{2} & \equiv 4 \\
3^{2} & \equiv 2 \\
4^{2}\equiv ( -3 )^{2} & \equiv 2 \\
5^{2} \equiv (-2)^{2} & \equiv 4 \\
6^{2} \equiv (-1)^{2} & =1
\end{align}
$$
and so the QRs modulo 7 are ${} 1,\, 2,\, 4 {}$ and the QNRs modulo $7$ are ${} 3,\, 5,\, 6 {}$. 
### Proposition 2.2:
Let $g$ be a PR modulo $p$, with $p>2 {}$. Also let ${} b \in \mathbb{Z} {}$, with ${} \gcd(b,\, p)=1 {}$. Suppose that ${} b\equiv g^{i}\:(\mathrm{mod}\  p)  {}$ for some ${} i \in \mathbb{N} {}$. Then $b$ is a QR iff $i$ is even. 
#### Proof:
Consider ${} x^{2}\equiv b \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p)  {}$. Let $g$ be a primitive root modulo $p$, and write ${} x\equiv g^{j}\:(\mathrm{mod}\  p)  {}$ and ${} b\equiv g^{i}\:(\mathrm{mod}\  p)  {}$. Then
$$
g^{2j}=g^{i} \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p) 
$$
and so ${} 2j\equiv i \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p-1)  {}$. Therefore, ${} p-1 {}$ is even, and so the equation has a solution iff ${} \gcd(2,\, p-1) \mid i {}$. Therefore, ${} 2\mid {} i {}$, and $i {}$ is even. 
### Corollary 2.3:
There are ${} \frac{ p-1 }{ 2 } {}$ QRs modulo $p$, and ${} \frac{ p-1 }{ 2 } {}$ QNRs modulo $p$, with $p>2 {}$. 
