---
tags:
  - chapter
  - numtheory1
date: 2024-11-12
---
[[Directory]], [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Introduction to Number Theory 1/Introduction to Number Theory 1|Subject Directory]]
[[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Introduction to Number Theory 1/Lectures/1. Introduction|🞀🞀]] [[12. Euler's Criterion and Applications|◀]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Introduction to Number Theory 1/Lectures/14. |▶]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Introduction to Number Theory 1/Lectures/22. |🞂🞂]]
# 
## Primes of the form ${} 4n+1 {}$
### Theorem 1.1:
There are infinitely many primes of the form ${} 4n+1 {}$. 
#### Fact: (non-examinable)
Let ${} a,\, q \in \mathbb{N} {}$ with $q\geq 3$ and ${} \gcd(a,\, q)=1 {}$, then there are infinitely many primes ${} p$ with 
$$
p\equiv a \:(\mathrm{mod}\  q) 
$$
(Dirichlet's Theorem). This is much too advanced for this level.
#### Proof of 1.1: 
Key fact: ${} x^{2}+1\equiv 0\:(\mathrm{mod}\  p)  {}$ has a solution iff ${} p\equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  4)  {}$. For the sake of contradiction, suppose that there exist only finitely many primes ${} p_{1},\,\dots,\,p_{r} {}$ such that ${} p_{i}\equiv 1\:(\mathrm{mod}\  4)  {}$. Consider
$$
X=2p_{1}\dots p_{r}
$$
and
$$
N=X^{2}+1
$$
Let $q$ be a prime with ${} q \mid N {}$. Note that $q>2 {}$, since $N {}$ is odd. Also, ${} X^{2}+1\equiv 0 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  q)  {}$. Therefore, ${} q\equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  4)  {}$. However, ${} q=p_{i} {}$ for some $1\leq i\leq r$. Therefore, ${} q \mid X {}$. However, since $q \mid N {}$, then this is impossible, and so there are infinitely many primes of the form ${} 4k+1. {}$
### Problem:
Quickly determine if ${} b \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p)  {}$, ${} p \nmid b {}$, is a QR. 
## Legendre Symbol
### Definition 1.2: Legendre Symbol
Let ${} b \in \mathbb{Z} {}$ and let ${} p >2 {}$. The Legendre Symbol ${} \left( \frac{b}{p} \right) {}$ is given by
$$
\left( \frac{b}{p} \right) =\begin{cases}
1  & \text{ if }b \text{ is a quadratic residue} \\
-1  & \text{ if }b \text{ is a quadratic non-residue} \\
0 & \text{ if } p \mid b
\end{cases}
$$
#### Remarks:
Let ${} p>2 {}$ be a prime. 
- ${} \left( \frac{\bullet }{p}  \right):\mathbb{Z} \to{} \{ -1,\, 0,\, 1 \} {}$
- ${} \left( \frac{1}{p} \right)=1 {}$ for every $p>2 {}$
- Let ${} b \in \mathbb{Z} {}$, $p\nmid b$. Then ${} \left( \frac{b^{2}}{p} \right)=1 {}$. 
 - If ${} a,\, b \in \mathbb{Z} {}$ and ${} a\equiv b \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p)  {}$, the ${} \left( \frac{a}{p} \right)= \left( \frac{b}{p} \right) {}$. 
This gives us
### Lemma 1.3: Periodicity of the Legendre Symbol
For all ${} \ell \in  \mathbb{Z} {}$, 
$$
\left( \frac{ a+\ell p }{ p } \right)=\left( \frac{a}{p} \right)
$$
#### Example:
Compute
$$
\left( \frac{285}{11} \right)
$$
Thanks to periodicity, ${} 285\equiv 10\equiv -1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  11)  {}$. By periodicity, 
$$
\left( \frac{285}{11} \right)=\left( -\frac{1}{11} \right)
$$
We have that $-1 {}$ is a QR modulo $p$ iff ${} p\equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  4)  {}$. We have that ${} 11\equiv 3 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  4)  {}$, hence ${} \left( \frac{-1}{11} \right)=-1 {}$. 
### Lemma 1.4: Solution Counting
Let ${} b \in \mathbb{Z} {}$, and let $p>2 {}$ be prime. Then the number of solutions in ${} \mathbb{Z}_{p}$ of
$$
x^{2} \equiv b \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p) 
$$
is equal to ${} 1+\left( \frac{b}{p} \right) {}$
#### Proof:
See notes #todo 
### Lemma 1.5: Multiplicativity
Let ${} a,\, b \in \mathbb{Z} {}$, $p>2 {}$ a prime. Then
$$
\left( \frac{ab}{p} \right)=\left( \frac{a}{p} \right)\left( \frac{b}{p} \right)
$$
#### Proof:
For any ${} c \in \mathbb{Z} {}$, Euler's criterion implies
$$
c^{\frac{ p-1 }{ 2 }}\equiv \left( \frac{c}{p} \right) \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p) 
$$
We have the following:
