---
tags:
  - chapter
  - numtheory1
date: 2024-11-15
completed: true
---
[[Directory]], [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Introduction to Number Theory 1/Introduction to Number Theory 1|Subject Directory]]
[[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Introduction to Number Theory 1/Lectures/1. Introduction|🞀🞀]] [[13. Properties of the Legendre Symbol|◀]] [[15. Two Squares Theorem|▶]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Introduction to Number Theory 1/Lectures/22. |🞂🞂]]
# 
## Quadratic Reciprocity
#### Example:
Determine for which primes $p$ is $5$ is a quadratic residue ${} \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p)  {}$, i.e. when ${} p$ with ${} \left( \frac{5}{p} \right)=1 {}$.
Now
$$
\begin{align}
\left( \frac{5}{p} \right)=(-1)^{p-1} \left( \frac{p}{5} \right)=\left( \frac{p}{5} \right)
\end{align}
$$
We know that the quadratic residues in ${} 5 {}$ are ${} 1 {}$ and ${} 4 {}$. Therefore, ${} \left( \frac{p}{5} \right)=1 {}$ iff ${} p\equiv 1,\, 4 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  5)  {}$
# Sums of Two Squares
### Definition 2.1: Sum of Two Squares
An integer ${} m \in \mathbb{N} {}$ is a sum of two squares (SOTS) if there exist ${} a,\, b \in \mathbb{Z} {}$ with ${} m=a^{2}+b^{2} {}$. 
### Definition 2.2: The Gaussian Integers
The Gaussian integers is the ring ${} \mathbb{Z}[i]=\{ a+bi \mid a,\, b \in \mathbb{Z} \} {}$. 

Note that the units in ${} \mathbb{Z}[i] {}$ are ${} \{ 1,\, -1,\, i,\, -i \} {}$. 

### Definition 2.3: Divisibility in ${} \mathbb{Z}[i] {}$
We say that $\alpha$ divides $\beta$, and write $\alpha \mid  \beta {}$ if there exists some ${} \gamma \in \mathbb{Z}[i] {}$ such that ${} \alpha \cdot \gamma=\beta {}$
### Definition 2.4: Primes in ${} \mathbb{Z}[i]$.
A Gaussian prime is a Gaussian integer ${} \mathfrak{p} \in \mathbb{Z}[i] {}$ such that if ${} \mathfrak{p}\mid ab {}$, j${} \alpha,\, \beta \in \mathbb{Z}[i] {}$, then $\mathfrak{p} \mid \alpha {}$ or ${} \mathfrak{p} \mid b {}$.
#### Note: 
${} \mathbb{Z} \subseteq \mathbb{Z}[i] {}$
### Question
If ${} p \in \mathbb{Z} {}$ is $p$ a prime in $\mathbb{Z}$, is $p$ a Gaussian prime. 
#### Example:
Take ${} p=5 {}$. Then  ${} 5=2^{2}+1^{2}=(2+i)(2-i) {}$ and so $5$ is not a Gaussian prime. 
#### Fact: (non-examinable)
If ${} p=a^{2}+b^{2} {}$, then ${} a+ib {}$ and ${} a-ib {}$ are Gaussian primes, with ${} p>2 {}$

Therefore, we want to study which primes are SOTS.
### Lemma 2.5:
Suppose that ${} m \in \mathbb{Z} {}$ is a SOTS. Then ${} m\equiv 0,\, 1,\, 2 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  4)  {}$. 
#### Proof:
Write ${} m=a^{2}+b^{2} {}$, ${} a,\, b \in \mathbb{Z} {}$. Notice ${} a^{2}\equiv 0,\, 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  4)  {}$, and so ${} m\equiv a^{2}+b^{2}\equiv 0,\, 1,\, 2 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  4)  {}$
#### Facts:
If ${} \alpha,\, \beta \in \mathbb{Z}[i] {}$, with ${} \alpha =a+bi {}$, and ${} \beta=c+di {}$, ${} a,\, b,\, c,\, d \in \mathbb{Z} {}$, then
$$
\begin{align}
 \conj{\alpha} & =a-bi   \\
\conj{\alpha\beta} & =\conj{\alpha} \cdot  \conj{\beta} \\
\alpha \bar{\alpha} & =|\alpha|^{2}=a^{2}+b^{2} \\
\alpha+\beta & =(ac-bd)+i(ad +bc)
 \end{align}
$$
### Lemma 2.6: Closure Under Multiplication
If ${} m,\, n \in \mathbb{Z} {}$ are each SOTS, then $m\cdot n$ is a SOTS.
#### Proof:
write ${} m=a^{2}+b^{2} {}$, ${} n=c^{2}+d^{2} {}$. Let ${} \alpha=a\pm ib,\, \beta=c+id {}$, and $\gamma=\alpha\beta {}$. Then
$$
\begin{align}
m & =\alpha\bar{\alpha} \\
n & =\beta\bar{\beta}
\end{align}
$$
and so
$$
mn=\alpha\bar{\alpha}\beta\bar{\beta}=(\alpha\beta)\conj{(\alpha\beta)}=\gamma\bar{\gamma}=(ac-bd)^{2}+(ad +bc)^{2}
$$
#### Example:
Write ${} 1313=101\cdot 13 {}$ as a SOTS.