---
tags:
  - chapter
  - numtheory1
date: 2024-10-08
---
[[Directory]], [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Introduction to Number Theory 1/Introduction to Number Theory 1|Subject Directory]]
[[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Introduction to Number Theory 1/Lectures/1. Introduction|🞀🞀]] [[4. Polynomials Modulo m|◀]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Introduction to Number Theory 1/Lectures/6. |▶]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Introduction to Number Theory 1/Lectures/22. |🞂🞂]]
# 
## 
### 
#todo:watch till 12:20
In general, given ${} m=p_{1}^{a_{1}} p_{2}^{a_{2}}\dots p_{n}^{a_{n}} {}$, where the ${} p_{i} {}$'s are distinct, so that for $i\neq j$, 
$$
\gcd(p_{i}^{a_{i}},\, p_{j}^{a_{J}})=1
$$
Then the solutions to ${} f(x)\equiv 0\:(\mathrm{mod}\  m)  {}$ (where ${} f(x)=c_{n}x^{n}+\dots +c_{1} x+c_{0},\, c_{i} \in \mathbb{Z} {}$) correspond 1 to 1 to the solutions to
$$
\begin{align}
f(x) & \equiv 0\:(\mathrm{mod}\  p_{1}^{a_{1}}) \\
f(x) & \equiv 0 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p_{2}^{a_{2}})  \\
\vdots  &  \\
f(x) & \equiv 0 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p_{n}^{a_{n}})  
\end{align}
$$
### Theorem 1.1:
For a prime $p {}$, and  ${} f(x)=c_{n}x^{n}+\dots +c_{1} x+c_{0},\, c_{i} \in \mathbb{Z}$, the equation ${} f(x)\equiv 0 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p)  {}$ has at most ${} \deg f {}$ solutions in ${} \mathbb{Z}_{p} {}$
#### Proof:
Non examinable. #todo proof in notes
#### Example:
${} x^{2}+1 \equiv 0\:(\mathrm{mod}\  65)  {}$ has $4$ solutions: ${} x\equiv 8,\, 18,\, 47,\, 57 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  65)  {}$, despite ${} \deg (x^{2}+1)=2 {}$. This is because ${} 65=5\cdot 13 {}$ is not prime. 
### Theorem 1.2: the Chinese Remainder Theorem
Let ${} m,\, n {}$ be co-prime integers. Then the map 
$$
\Psi: \mathbb{Z}_{mn} \to{} \mathbb{Z}_{m} \times  \mathbb{Z}_{n}
$$
Given by 
$$
\Psi([a]_{mn})=([a]_{m},\, [a]_{n})
$$
is a ring isomorphism.
#### Proof:
#todo 
(see notes) 
# Multiplicative Group of Integers mod m
### Definition 2.1: Units
Let $R {}$ be a commutative ring with multiplicative identity ${} 1 {}$, then ${} a \in R {}$ is a *unit* iff there exists another element ${} b \in R {}$ with ${} ab=ba=1 {}$.
#### Example:
In $\mathbb{Z}$, the only units are ${} 1,\, -1 {}$.
In $\mathbb{Q} {}$, all $\mathbb{Q} \setminus \{  0\} {}$ are units
If ${} R=\{ a+bi \mid  a,\, b \in \mathbb{Z} \} {}$. Then the units are ${} 1,\, -1,\, i,\, -i {}$. (apparently this isn't examinable)
### Notation:
Given ${} m \in \mathbb{Z} {}$, $m\neq 0$, then
$$
\mathbb{Z}_{m}^{\times }=\{ [a]_{m} \in \mathbb{Z}_{m} \mid  [a]_{m} \text{ is a unit} \}
$$
- If ${} [a]_{m} \in \mathbb{Z}_{m} {}$ is a unit with ${} a \cdot b=1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  m) {}$, we call ${} [b]_{m} {}$ the multiplicative inverse of ${} [a]_{m} {}$, and write
$$
[a]_{m} ^{-1}=[b]_{m}
$$
- ${} \mathbb{Z}_{m}^{\times } {}$ is called the multiplicative group of units of ${} \mathbb{Z}_{m}$. 
#### Example:
Let ${} m=6 {}$. 
- ${} [5]_{6} {}$ is a unit iff ${} 5u\equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  6)  {}$. Clearly ${} u=5 {}$, as ${} 5\cdot 5\equiv 25\equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  6)  {}$, then ${} 5^{-1}=5 {}$ and $5$ is a unit.
- ${} [4]_{6} {}$ is a unit iff ${} 4u=1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  6)  {}$. But then ${} 4u-6v=1 {}$, if there existed such a $u$, then that would imply that ${} \gcd(4,\, 6)=1\neq 2 {}$ which is a contradiction. Therefore, $4$ is not a unit. 
In particular we see that the units are ${} 1,\, 5 {}$, as all other numbers are not coprime with $6$. 
### Lemma 2.2:
Let ${} m,\, a \in \mathbb{Z} {}$, with $m\neq 0$. Then ${} [a]_{m} \in \mathbb{Z}_{m} {}$ is a unit iff ${} \gcd(a,\, m)=1 {}$.
#### Remark:
Then 
$$
\mathbb{Z}_{m}^{\times }=\{ [a]_{m} \in \mathbb{Z}_{m} \mid \gcd(a,\, m)=1 \}
$$
#### Proof:
Suppose that ${} \gcd(a,\, m)=1 {}$. Then there exist some ${} u,\, v \in \mathbb{Z} {}$ with ${} au+mv=1 {}$, and
$$
au+mv\equiv au\equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  m) 
$$
and so ${} u=a^{-1} {}$, and $a$ is a unit. 

Conversely, suppose that $a$ is a unit with inverse $u$. Then ${} au\equiv au+vm=1\equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  m)  {}$, and then by Bézout's lemma, ${} \gcd(a,\, m)=1 {}$.
