---
tags:
  - chapter
  - numtheory1
date: 2024-10-18
---
[[Directory]], [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Introduction to Number Theory 1/Introduction to Number Theory 1|Subject Directory]]
[[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Introduction to Number Theory 1/Lectures/1. Introduction|🞀🞀]] [[7. Euler's Totient and Orders|◀]] [[9. Didn't Happen|▶]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Introduction to Number Theory 1/Lectures/22. |🞂🞂]]
# Structure of ${} \mathbb{Z}_{n}^{\times }  {}$
## Primitive Roots
### Problem:
Determine the positive integers ${} m {}$ for which ${} \mathbb{Z}_{m}^{\times } {}$ is cyclic.
#### Example:
Last time we say that ${} \mathbb{Z}_{9}^{\times } {}$ is cyclic, but ${} \mathbb{Z}_{8}^{\times } {}$ is not. 
#### Example:
${} \mathbb{Z}_{11}^{\times } {}$ is cyclic and is generated by ${} [6]_{11} {}$. 
### Definition 1.1: Primitive Roots
Let ${} m \in \mathbb{N} {}$ and let ${} a \in \mathbb{Z} {}$ with ${} \gcd(a,\, m)=1 {}$. If ${} o([a]_{m})=\phi(m) {}$, then $a$ is a primitive root modulo $m$. 
#### Notation: 
Abbreviate primitive root to PR
#### Example:
${} 6 {}$ is a PR modulo ${} 11 {}$
There is no primitive root modulo $8$. 
- If $g$ is a PR modulo $m$, then ${} \mathbb{Z}_{m}^{\times } {}$ is cyclic and
$$
\mathbb{Z}_{m}^{\times }=\{ [g]_{m}^{i} \mid  1\leq i\leq \phi(m) \}
$$
that is, $g$ generates ${} \mathbb{Z}_{m}^{\times } {}$.
### Theorem 1.2: Primitive Root Test
Let ${} m \in \mathbb{N} {}$, ${} a \in \mathbb{Z} {}$ with ${} \gcd(a,\, m)=1 {}$, and with $m\geq 3$. Then $a$ is a PR modulo $m$ iff, for each prime ${} p \mid  \phi(m) {}$, then
$$
a^{\phi(m)/p} \not\equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  m) 
$$
#### Proof:
In the lecture notes #todo 
#### Example:
Find a PR ${} \:(\mathrm{mod}\  7)  {}$. We want ${} a \in \mathbb{Z} {}$ such that ${} \gcd(a,\, 7)=1 {}$ such that ${} o([a]_{7})=\phi(7)=6 {}$. 

First, lets try $2$. The prime divisors of ${} \phi(7)=6 {}$ are $2$ and $3$. So now
$$
\begin{align}
2^{6 /2}=2^{3}=8\equiv 1 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  7) 
\end{align}
$$
and $2$ is not a primitive root. Next, lets try $3$. Then
$$
\begin{align}
 3^{6/3}=9  & \equiv 2 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  7) \\
3^{6/2}\equiv 27 & \equiv 6 \:(\mathrm{mod}\  7)   
 \end{align}
$$
so ${} 3$ is a primitive root
### Theorem 1.3:
For each prime $p$, then ${} \mathbb{Z}_{p}^{\times } {}$ is cyclic. Moreover, for each divisor ${} d \in \mathbb{N} {}$ with ${} d \mid  (p-1) {}$, there are ${} \phi(d)$ elements of order $d$. 
#### Proof:
Two key facts used in the proof. The first, is that for all ${} m \in \mathbb{N} {}$, then ${} \sum _{d \mid m} \phi(d)=m {}$. The second is that, for each ${} d \mid  p-1 {}$, if we let $W_{d}=\{ [a]_{p} \in \mathbb{Z} \mid  o([a]_{p})=d \} {}$, then ${} |W_{d}| \leq \phi(d) {}$. 

Now we prove the theorem. First, note that we can partition ${} \mathbb{Z}_{p}^{\times }=\bigcup _{d \mid  p-1}W_{d} {}$, and ${} W_{d_{1}} \cap  W_{d_{2}}=\varnothing  {}$ for ${} d_{1} \neq d_{2} {}$. Now
$$
\begin{align}
p-1= \left| \mathbb{Z}_{p}^{\times } \right|  & =\left| \bigcup _{d \mid  p-1} W_{d}  \right| \\
 & = \sum_{d \mid  p-1} |W_{d}|
\end{align}
$$
Therefore, 
$$
\sum _{d \mid  p-1} \phi(d)= \sum_{d \mid  p-1 }|W_{d}|
$$
and so
$$
\sum _{d \mid  p-1} (\phi(d)-W_{d})
$$
but since ${} W_{d} \leq  \phi(d) {}$, then ${} |W_{d}|=\phi(d) {}$ for each ${} d  \mid p-1 {}$.
#### Example:
Determine the number of PR modulo $23 {}$. Since $p$ is prime, then there are ${} \phi(\phi(23))=\phi(22)=10 {}$ primitive roots. 
#### Example: (exam 2022)
Show that
$$
(p-1)! \equiv g^{1+2+3+\dots+p-1} \:(\mathrm{mod}\  p) 
$$
Where ${} g$ is a PR mod ${} p$.

We have that
$$
[(p-1)!]_{p}=\prod _{[a]_{p} \in \mathbb{Z}_{p}^{\times }}[a]_{p}=\prod _{j=1}^{p-1} [g]^{j}_{p}=[g]_{p}^{1+2+\dots +p-1}
$$


