---
tags:
  - exercises
  - dnf_algebra
date: 2023-11-10
---
[[Directory]], [[D&F Abstract Algebra]]
[[Abstract Algebra - David S. Dummit, Richard M. Foote.pdf#page=49|Exercise Sheet]]
1. 
There are ${} 2^{4}=16 {}$ possible matrices. Now we see that if ${} \det(A)=0 {}$, then we have ${} ac-bd=0 {}$, so $ac=bd {}$, with ${} a,\, b,\, c,\, d\in \{ 0,\, 1 \} {}$. Therefore we want ${} ac\neq bd {}$, so ${} ac=1 {}$ and ${} bd=0 {}$ or ${} ac=0 {}$ and ${} bd=1 {}$. If ${} ac=1 {}$, the ${} a=c=1 {}$, and ${} bd=0$ means either ${} b=d=0 {}$, or ${} b=0 {}$, ${} d=1$, or ${} b=1,\, d=0 {}$. Therefore, we have $3$ possibilities. Likewise if ${} ac=0$. Therefore, there are $6 {}$ possible matrices
2. 
${} \left| \begin{pmatrix}1 & 0 \\ 0 & 1 \end{pmatrix}  \right| =1 {}$
${} \left| \begin{pmatrix}1 & 1 \\ 0 & 1 \end{pmatrix}  \right| =2 {}$
${} \left| \begin{pmatrix}1 & 0 \\ 1 & 1 \end{pmatrix}  \right| =2 {}$
${} \left| \begin{pmatrix}0 & 1 \\ 1 & 0 \end{pmatrix}  \right|=2$
${} \left| \begin{pmatrix}1 & 1 \\ 1 & 0 \end{pmatrix}  \right| =3$
${} \left| \begin{pmatrix}0 & 1 \\ 1 & 1 \end{pmatrix}  \right| =3 {}$
3. 
skip
4. 
If ${} n {}$ is not prime, then it must have some divisor ${} m {}$ such that ${} n=mk {}$ for some $k {}$. Consider the element ${} [m]_{n}$. It does not have an inverse, as ${} [k]_{n}[m]_{n}=[km]_{n}=[0]_{n} {}$. Therefore, if there existed some number $j$ such that ${} [mj]_{n}=[1]_{n} {}$, then ${} [0]_{n}=[0\cdot j]_{n}=[k]_{n}[m]_{n}[j]_{n}=[k]_{n} {}$. Therefore, ${} 0\equiv k$, which is ridiculous, as then ${} k=nq {}$, but ${} k<n {}$. Therefore, if ${} n$ is not prime, then ${} \mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z} {}$ is not a field.
5. 
Suppose that $F$ has a finite number of elements. Let ${} m=|F|$. Then there are at most ${} m^{n^{2}} {}$ possible matrices, which is finite. 
Now suppose that ${} F$ has a infinite number of elements. Notice that, if $I {}$ is the identity matrix, that is, the one with ${} 1\in F {}$ along the diagonal, then for all non-zero ${} a \in F {}$, $aI {}$ is a matrix. with non-zero determinant. These matrices correspond 1 to 1 with elements of ${} F$, so it has infinite elements
6. skip 
7. skip but maybe come back?
8. skip (done it before)
9. 
Let ${} a_{1},\, a_{2},\, a_{3},\, b_{1},\, b_{2},\, b_{3},\, c_{1},\, c_{2},\, c_{3},\, d_{1},\, d_{2},\, d_{3} \in \mathbb{R} {}$. Now we see that
$$
\begin{align}
 & \qquad\begin{pmatrix}a_{1} & b_{1} \\ c_{1} & d_{1} \end{pmatrix} \left( \begin{pmatrix}a_{2} & b_{2} \\ c_{2} & d_{2} \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix}a_{3} & b_{3} \\ c_{3} & d_{3} \end{pmatrix}  \right)  =\begin{pmatrix}a_{1} & b_{1} \\ c_{1} & d_{1} \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix}a_{2}a_{3}+b_{2}c_{3} & a_{2}b_{3}+b_{2}d_{3} \\ c_{2}a_{3}+d_{2}c_{3} & c_{2}b_{3}+d_{2}d_{3} \end{pmatrix}  \\
   & =\begin{pmatrix}a_{1}a_{2}a_{3}+a_{1}b_{2}c_{3}+b_{1}c_{2}a_{3}+b_{1}d_{2}c_{3} & a_{1}a_{2}b_{3}+a_{1}b_{2}d_{3}+b_{1}c_{2}b_{3}+b_{1}d_{2}d_{3} \\ c_{1}a_{2}a_{3}+c_{1}b_{2}c_{3}+d_{1}c_{2}a_{3}+d_{1}d_{2}c_{3}  & c_{1}a_{2}b_{3}+c_{1}b_{2}d_{3}+d_{1}c_{2}b_{3}+d_{1}d_{2}d_{3} \end{pmatrix}  \\
 & =\begin{pmatrix} a_{1}a_{2}+b_{1}c_{2}& a_{1}b_{2}+b_{1}d_{2} \\ c_{1}a_{2}+d_{1}c_{2} & c_{1}b_{2}+d_{1}d_{2} \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix}a_{3} & b_{3} \\ c_{3} & d_{3} \end{pmatrix}  \\
 &=\left(\begin{pmatrix}a_{1} & b_{1} \\ c_{1} & d_{1} \end{pmatrix}  \begin{pmatrix}a_{2} & b_{2} \\ c_{2} & d_{2} \end{pmatrix}\right) \begin{pmatrix}a_{3} & b_{3} \\ c_{3} & d_{3} \end{pmatrix}
\end{align}
$$
(eurgh)
10. a)
We have
$$
\begin{pmatrix}a_{1} & b_{1} \\ 0 & c_{1} \end{pmatrix} \begin{pmatrix}a_{2} & b_{2} \\ 0 & c_{2} \end{pmatrix} =\begin{pmatrix}a_{1}a_{2} & a_{1}b_{2}+b_{1}c_{2} \\ 0 & c_{1}c_{2} \end{pmatrix} 
$$
Since ${} a_{1},\, a_{2},\, c_{1},\, c_{2}\neq 0 {}$, then $a_{1}a_{2}\neq 0 {}$ and $c_{1}c_{2}\neq 0$, so it is closed
b)
We want 
$$
\begin{pmatrix}x & y \\ 0 & z \end{pmatrix}
$$
To be the inverse of ${} \begin{pmatrix}a & b \\ 0 & c \end{pmatrix}$. By the above multiplication, we have ${} ax=1 {}$ and ${} cz=1 {}$, so
$$
\begin{align}
x & =\frac{1}{a} \\
z & =\frac{1}{c}
\end{align}
$$
Then we have ${} ay+bz=0 {}$. Therefore, 
$$
\begin{align}
ay+bz =ay+\frac{b}{c}  & =0\\
ay & = -\frac{b}{c} \\
y & =-\frac{b}{ca}
\end{align}
$$
Since ${} x,\, y\neq 0$, then the matrix ${} \begin{pmatrix}x & y \\ 0 & z \end{pmatrix}\in G {}$.
c)
Since $G$ is closed under the same operation of $GL_{2}(\mathbb{R})$, then since $G$ is a group, then ${} G \leq GL_{2}(\mathbb{R}) {}$.
d)
Let
$$
G=\left\{  \begin{pmatrix}a & b \\ 0 & c \end{pmatrix} \mid a,\, b,\, c \in \mathbb{R},\, a,\, c\neq 0,\, a=c  \right\}
$$
Then as above, since ${} a_{1}=c_{1} {}$ and ${} a_{2}=c_{2} {}$, then ${} a_{1}a_{2}=c_{1}c_{2} {}$
Likewise, we see that the inversion formula still holds if ${} a=c {}$. Therefore, $G$ is a subgroup of $GL_{2}(\mathbb{R})$
11. skip
