---
tags:
  - dnf_algebra
  - exercises
date: 2023-11-20
---
[[Directory]], [[D&F Abstract Algebra]]
[[Abstract Algebra - David S. Dummit, Richard M. Foote.pdf#page=58|Exercise Sheet]]
1. skip
2. skip
3. skip
4. a)
Let ${} G {}$ be a group acting on a set $A$. Let ${} a \in A {}$. The kernel of the action is 
$$
K=\{ g \in G\mid \forall b \in A:gb=b  \}
$$
It is clear that this is both associative and a subset of $G {}$. Next, if ${} g,\, h \in K$, then ${} (gh)a=g(ha)=ga=a {}$, so $gh \in K {}$. Now by definition, $1 \in K$. Finally, if ${} g \in K {}$, then ${} ga=a$. Therefore, ${} a=1a=(gg^{-1})a=g(g^{-1}a) {}$. Since ${} g {}$ acts bijectively, then if ${} g(g^{-1}a)=a {}$, then ${} g^{-1}a=a {}$. Therefore, ${} g^{-1} \in K {}$, and $K\leq G {}$.

b) 
The stabiliser of this action w.r.t ${} a {}$ is
$$
S=\{ g \in G\mid ga=a \}
$$
It is clear that this is both associative and a subset of ${} G$. Next, if ${} g,\, h \in S {}$, then ${} (gh)a=g(ha)=ga=a {}$, so ${} gh \in S {}$. Now, by definition, ${} 1a=a {}$, so ${} 1 \in S {}$. Finally, if ${} g \in S {}$, then ${} ga=a {}$. Therefore, ${} a=1a=(g g^{-1})a=g(g^{-1}a) {}$. Since $g$ acts bijectively, then if ${} g(g^{-1}a)=a {}$, then ${} g^{-1}a=a {}$. Therefore, ${} g^{-1} \in S {}$ and $S\leq G {}$
5. skip
6. skip
7. skip
8. 
a)
Let ${} \sigma, \tau \in S_{A}$. Then, 
$$
\begin{align}
 \tau\cdot (\sigma\cdot \{ a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{k} \})  & =\tau\cdot \{ \sigma(a_{1}),\,\dots,\,\sigma(a_{k}) \}  \\
 & =\{ \tau(\sigma(a_{1})),\,\dots,\,\tau(\sigma(a_{k})) \} \\
 & =\{ (\tau \circ \sigma)(a_{1}),\,\dots,\,(\tau \circ \sigma)(a_{k}) \} \\
 & =(\tau \circ \sigma)\{ a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{k} \}
 \end{align}
$$
and 
$$
1\cdot \{ a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{k} \}=\{ 1(a_{1}),\,\dots,\,1(a_{k}) \}=\{ a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{k} \}
$$
as required. Therefore, $\cdot {}$ is a group action.
b)
skip
9. double skip holee
10. 
a) If $k\geq 1 {}$, then the action if faithful. We want to show that the kernel of the action is trivial. So, consider some permutation ${} \sigma \in S_{n}$. Given some ${} S \in B {}$, if ${} \sigma S=S {}$, then ${} \forall a_{k} \in S, a_{k}\notin \sigma. {}$ Since every element of ${} A {}$ in contained in at least 1 ${} k {}$-element subset, as $k\geq 1 {}$, then, if, for all ${} S \in B {}$, ${} \sigma S=S {}$, then ${} a_{k}\notin \sigma {}$ for all ${} a_{k} \in A {}$. Therefore, ${} \sigma=1 {}$, so the kernel is trivial, so the action is faithful. 
b) Same proof as above
11. 
$$
\begin{align}
 D(1) & =()\\
D(r) & =(1\;2\;3\;4)   \\
D(r^{2}) & =(1\;3)(2\;4) \\
D(r^{3}) & =(1\;4\;3\;2) \\
D(s) & =(1\;2)(3\;4) \\
D(sr) & =(2\;4) \\
D(sr^{2}) & =(1\;4)(2\;3) \\
D(sr^{3}) & =(1\;3)
 \end{align}
$$
12. skip
13. 
Let $G$ be a group, and let ${} a \in G {}$. If the left regular action ${} a\cdot g=g$ for all ${} g \in G {}$, then ${} a\cdot g=ag=g {}$, so ${} a=1 {}$. Therefore, the kernel of the action is ${} \{ 1 \}$ is trivial
14. 
Let ${} g,\, h \in G {}$, and ${} a \in A=G {}$. Now we have
$$
g\cdot (h\cdot a)=g\cdot (ah)=ahg
$$
which iff $G {}$ is commutative, $ahg=agh=(gh)\cdot a {}$. Now
$$
1\cdot a=a 1=a
$$
So it is an action iff $G {}$ is commutative, as required
15. 
Let ${} g,\, h \in G$, and $a \in A=G {}$. Now we have
$$
g\cdot (h\cdot a)=g\cdot (ah^{-1})=ah^{-1}g^{-1}=a(gh)^{-1}=(gh)\cdot a
$$
and
$$
1\cdot a=a1^{-1}=a 1=a
$$
as required
16. 
Let ${} g,\, h \in G {}$, and ${} a \in A=G {}$. Now we have
$$
g\cdot (h\cdot a)=g\cdot (hah^{-1})=ghah^{-1}g^{-1}=gha(gh)^{-1}=(gh)\cdot a
$$
and
$$
1\cdot a=1a 1^{-1}=a 1^{}=a
$$
as required.
17. Let ${} \sigma_{g}:G\to{}G {}$ such that ${} \sigma_{g}(x)=gxg^{-1}$. Suppose that ${} \sigma_{g}(x)=\sigma_{g}(y) {}$. Then
$$
\begin{align}
 gxg^{-1} & =gyg^{-1}  \\
 xg^{-1} & =yg^{-1} \\
x & =y
 \end{align}
$$
Therefore, ${} \sigma_{g}$ is injective. Now suppose that ${} x \in G {}$. Then $\sigma_{g}(g^{-1}xg)=g g^{-1}xgg^{-1}=x$. Therefore, $\sigma_{g} {}$ is surjective, so bijective. Now take ${} x,\, y \in G {}$. Then 
$$
\sigma_{g}(xy)=gxyg^{-1}=gxg^{-1}gyg^{-1}=\sigma_{g}(x)\sigma_{g}(y)
$$
Therefore, ${} \sigma_{g}$ is a homomorphism, so it is an isomorphism from $G$ to $G$.

This follows from a previous exercise (Section 1.6, question 2), as ${} \sigma_{g}  {}$ is an isomorphism of $G$. Let ${} A \subseteq G {}$. Since ${} \sigma_{g} {}$ is an isomorphism, then $|A|=|\sigma_{g}(A)|$ (almost by definition of cardinality).
18. 
First, ${} a=1a {}$, so $a \sim a$. Next, if $a\sim b$, then ${} a=hb {}$, so ${} b=h^{-1}a {}$, so $b\sim a$.
Finally, if $a\sim b$, and $b\sim c$, then ${} a=gb {}$, and ${} b=hc {}$, so ${} a=ghc {}$, so $a\sim c$. Therefore, $\sim$ is an equivalence relation
19. 
Let $G$ be a group and let $H\leq G$. Let ${} H {}$ act on G. Let ${} x \in G$, and let $\mathcal{O}=\{ y \in G\mid \exists g \in H:y=gx \} {}$ be the orbit of ${} x$ under this action. Let ${} \varphi:H\to{}\mathcal{O} {}$ such that $\varphi(h)=hx$. Suppose ${} \varphi(a)=\varphi(b)$. Then ${} ax=bx {}$, so ${} a=b$. Now let ${} a \in \mathcal{O} {}$. Then there exist some ${} b \in G {}$ such that ${} a=bx^{-1} {}$; in particular, ${} b=ax {}$. Therefore, ${} \varphi(b)=ax^{-1}x=a {}$. Therefore, $\varphi$ is surjective so bijective. Therefore, ${} |\mathcal{O}|=|H| {}$. Since there are no restrictions placed on $x {}$, then every orbit is the same size.

Now if ${} G {}$ is finite, then since every orbit is of equal size, and represents a partition of $G {}$, then there must be some integer ${} n$ such that $n|H|=|G|$, that is, ${} |H|\mid |G| {}$.
20. skip
21. skip
22. skip
23. skip
