---
tags:
  - dnf_algebra
  - exercises
date: 2023-11-21
---
[[Directory]], [[D&F Abstract Algebra|Subject Directory]]
[[Abstract Algebra - David S. Dummit, Richard M. Foote.pdf#page=61|Exercise Sheet]]
1. 
a)
Let ${} z,\, w \in S$. Then, ${} z=a+ai,\, w=b+bi,\, a,\, b \in \mathbb{R}$. then ${} z-w=a+ai-b-bi=(a-b)+(a-b)i$, and ${} a-b \in R {}$, so ${} z-w\in S {}$. Therefore, $S$ is a subgroup of $\mathbb{C}$.
b) skip
c)
Let ${} p,\, q \in S {}$. Then ${} p=\frac{a}{k} {}$ and ${} q=\frac{b}{m} {}$, where $k\mid n$ and $m\mid n$. Therefore, we have ${} n=xk$ and ${} n=ym {}$ for some ${} x,\, y \in \mathbb{Z}$. Therefore, 
$$
p-q=\frac{a}{k}-\frac{b}{m}=\frac{a}{\frac{n}{x}}-\frac{b}{\frac{n}{y}}=\frac{ax}{n}-\frac{by}{n}=\frac{ax-by}{n} \in S
$$
Therefore, $S\leq \mathbb{Q}$.
d) skip
e) skip
2. 
a) $(1\;2)(2\;3)=(1\;2\;3)$
b) ${} s\cdot sr=r {}$
c) 
Let $G$ be a group with an element $g$, with ${} |g|=n$, $n$ is composite. Let $S=\{ g \in G \mid |x|=n\}\cup \{ 1 \}$. Take an element $g\in S {}$, $g\neq 1 {}$. Then there exists some ${} k \in \mathbb{Z} {}$ such that ${} k\mid n {}$. Then, ${} ( g^{k} )^{n/k}=1 {}$. Therefore, ${} |g^{k}|\neq n {}$, so $g^{k}\notin S$. But then $S$ is not closed, so it is not a subgroup
d) skip
e) skip
3. skip
4. 
Note that $\mathbb{N}\subseteq \mathbb{Z}$. ${} 0 \in \mathbb{N} {}$, and ${} a,\, b\geq 0\Rightarrow a+b\geq 0$, but there are no inverses.
5. skip
6. 
Let $G$ be a commutative group. Let ${} S=\{ g \in G\mid |g|<\infty \} {}$. Let $x,\, y \in S$. Let ${} n=|x| {}$ and ${} m=|y| {}$. Then 
$$
( xy^{-1} )^{mn}=x^{mn}y^{-mn}=( x^{n} )^{m}(y^{m})^{-n}=1
$$
Therefore, ${} |xy^{-1}|<\infty$, so ${} xy^{-1} \in S {}$.

Take the group ${} \langle a,\, b\mid a^{2}=b^{2}=1 \rangle  {}$. The torsion set contains ${} a  {}$ and $b$ but ${} ab {}$ has infinite order.
7. 
Let $G=\mathbb{Z} \times  (\mathbb{Z} /n\mathbb{Z})$. The torsion subgroup of $G$ is
$$
\{ (a,\, b) \in G\mid|(a,\, b)|<\infty \}=\{ (a,\, b)\in G\mid (|a|<\infty)\wedge (|b|<\infty) \}
$$
Since, for all ${} x \in \mathbb{Z} {}$, if ${} x=0 {}$, then ${} |x|=0$, otherwise, ${} |x|=\infty {}$, then the torsion subgroup is exactly
$$
T=\{ 0 \}\times (\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z})\cong \mathbb{Z} /n\mathbb{Z}
$$
Now take ${} S=G\setminus T \cup \{ (0,\, 0) \} {}$. Note that ${} a=(1,\, 1),\, b=(1,\, 0) {}$, ${} a,\, b \in S {}$, and ${} |a|=|b|=\infty {}$. Then take ${} a-b=(1,\, 1)-(1,\, 0)=(0,\, 1) {}$, and ${} |(0,\, 1)|=n\neq \infty$ and is non-zero. Therefore, it is not a subgroup
8. skip
9. 
Let ${} A,\, B \in SL_{n}(F)$. Then since ${} \det(AB^{-1})=\det(A)\det(B^{-1}) {}$, and ${} \det(B^{-1})=1/\det(B) {}$, then ${} \det(AB^{-1})=1 {}$, so ${} AB^{-1}\in SL_{n}(F) {}$
10. 
a) skip
b)
Let ${} \mathcal{C} {}$ be a collection of subgroups of ${} G$, and let ${} S=\bigcap_{H\in \mathcal{C}} H {}$. Let ${} a,\, b \in S {}$. then for all ${} H \in \mathcal{C} {}$, ${} a,\, b \in H {}$. Therefore, ${} ab^{-1}\in H {}$, as they are all subgroups. Therefore, ${} ab^{-1}\in S {}$.
11. skip
12. 
a)
Let ${} S=\{ a^{n}\mid a \in G \}$. Let ${} x,\, y \in S {}$. Then ${} xy^{-1}=a^{n}b^{-n}=( ab^{-1} )^{n} {}$. Since ${} ab^{-1}\in G {}$, then ${} xy^{-1}\in G {}$.
b)
Let ${} S=\{ a \in G\mid a^{n}=1 \}$. Let ${} x,\, y \in S {}$. Then ${} ( xy^{-1} )^{n}=x^{n}( y^{n} )^{-1}=1 {}$, so ${} xy^{-1} \in S {}$.
13. 
Let ${} S\leq \mathbb{Q} {}$ with ${} \forall p \in S,\, 1 /p \in S {}$. Suppose there exists a non-zero element $q \in S$. Then ${} \{ nq\mid n \in \mathbb{Z} \}\subseteq S {}$. Therefore, ${} \mathbb{Z}\subseteq S$, so ${} \{1/n\mid n \in \mathbb{Z}\setminus \{ 0 \}\}\subseteq S$. Therefore, ${} \{ m /n \mid m \in \mathbb{Z},\, n \in \mathbb{Z}\setminus \{ 0 \} \}$. But this is exactly $\mathbb{Q}$, as required. Otherwise, $S$ is trivial.
14. skip
15. 
Let ${} H_{1}\leq H_{2}\leq\dots\leq H_{i}\leq\dots {}$ be a ascending chain of subgroups of . Let
$$
S=\bigcup_{i=1}^{\infty} H_{i}
$$
Let $x,\, y \in S$. Then, there exists a 