---
tags:
  - dnf_algebra
  - exercises
date: 2023-11-29
---
[[Directory]], [[D&F Abstract Algebra]]
[[Abstract Algebra - David S. Dummit, Richard M. Foote.pdf#page=78|Exercise Sheet]]
1. 
Let ${} H\leq G$. Note that ${} H\subseteq \langle H \rangle {}$. Now see that $H$ itself is a subgroup, so is contained in the intersection
$$
\langle H \rangle =\bigcap_{\substack{A \leq G \\ H\subseteq A} }A
$$ Therefore, ${} \langle H \rangle \subseteq H$, so ${} H=\langle H \rangle  {}$
2. 
Let ${} A \subseteq B \subseteq G {}$. Then ${} \langle B \rangle \leq G {}$, and ${} A\subseteq B\subseteq \langle B \rangle  {}$, so ${} \langle A \rangle \subseteq \langle B \rangle  {}$. Since ${} \langle A \rangle  {}$ is a group, then ${} \langle A \rangle \leq \langle  B \rangle  {}$
3. skip
4. skip
5. skip
6. 
$$
\langle (1\;2),\, (1\;2)(3\;4) \rangle=\{ 1,\, (1\;2),\, (3\;4),\, (1\;2)(3\;4) \}\cong \mathbb{Z}_{2} \times  \mathbb{Z}_{2}\cong V_{4}
$$
7. 
$$
\langle (1\;2),\, (1\;3)(2\;4) \rangle=\{ 1, (1\;4\;2\;3),\, (1\;2)(3\;4),\, (1\;3\;2\;4),\, (1\;2),\, (1\;3)(2\;4),\, (3\;4),\, (1\;4)(2\;3) \}
$$
Then the surjective homomorphism that maps ${} (1\;2)\mapsto a {}$ and ${} (1\;3)(2\;4)\mapsto b {}$ (surjective since those elements generate both groups) is an isomorphism, since ${} (1\;2)^{2}=((1\;3)(2\;4))^{2}=(1\;4\;2\;3)^{4}=1 {}$ holds. Therefore, ${} \langle (1\;2),\, (1\;3)(2\;4) \rangle \cong D_{8} {}$
8. skip
9. skip
10. skip
11. skip
12. skip
13. 
Let ${} S=\left\{  \frac{1}{p}\mid p \text{ prime}  \right\} {}$Let ${} a \in \mathbb{Q}^{+} {}$. Then there exist some ${} n,\, m \in \mathbb{Z}^{+} {}$ with ${} \gcd(n,\, m)=1 {}$ and ${} a=n / m {}$. By the fundamental theorem of arithmetic, there exist some primes ${} p_{1},\, p_{2},\,\dots,\,p_{r} {}$ and ${} q_{1},\, q_{2},\,\dots,\,q_{s} {}$ such that
$$
\begin{align}
 n & =p_{1} p_{2} \dots p_{r}   \\
m & =q_{1} q_{2} \dots q_{s}
 \end{align}
$$
Then 
$$
a=\frac{n}{m}=\frac{ p_{1} p_{2}\dots p_{r} }{ q_{1} q_{2} \dots q_{s} }=\left(  \frac{1}{p_{1}}  \right)^{-1} \left(  \frac{1}{p_{2}}  \right)^{-1}\dots \left(  \frac{1}{p_{r}}  \right)^{-1} \frac{1}{q_{1}} \frac{1}{q_{2}}\dots \frac{1}{q_{s}} \in \langle S \rangle 
$$
Therefore, ${} \mathbb{Q}^{+}=\langle S \rangle  {}$
14. 
a)
Let $H$ be a finite group. Then ${} H=\langle H \rangle  {}$, so $H$ is finitely generated.
b)
${} \mathbb{Z}=\langle 1 \rangle  {}$
c)
Let ${} H \subseteq \mathbb{Q} {}$, and ${} |H|<\infty {}$. Let ${} f:\langle H \rangle \to{}\mathbb{Z}^{+} {}$,with $f(x)=\text{the denominator of }x \text{ in reduced form}. {}$Now let ${} d=\prod_{x \in H} f(x) {}$. We have that ${} d {}$ is finite, as $H {}$ is finite. Then, every element may be expressed as ${} n/d {}$  for some ${} n \in \mathbb{Z} {}$, by proof by fucking obviousness

Therefore, ${} \langle H \rangle =\left\langle  \frac{1}{d}  \right\rangle  {}$, so $\langle H \rangle \cong \mathbb{Z} {}$
d)
Suppose that $\mathbb{Q} {}$ is finitely generated. By above, then $\mathbb{Q} {}$ is cyclic. However, we already showed that $\mathbb{Q}$ is not cyclic, therefore, $\mathbb{Q} {}$ is not finitely generated
15. 
$$
\left\langle  \left\{ \frac{1}{2^{n}} \mid   n \in \mathbb{Z}  \right\}  \right\rangle <\mathbb{Q}
$$
This subgroup is called the *dyadic fractions*
16. a)
Let ${} H<G$, with $G {}$ a finite group. Let ${} \{ K_{n} \}_{n=1}^{\infty}  {}$ be a sequence of strict subgroups of $G$, with ${} H\leq K_{1}\leq K_{2}\leq\dots\leq K_{n}\leq \dots {}$ Call such ${} \{K_{n}\}_{n=1}^{\infty} {}$ "maximising sequences". Since ${} G$ is finite, then there must exist some $n_{0}$ such that for all ${} n,\, m\geq n_{0},\, K_{m}=K_{n} {}$. Let ${} L(K_{n})  {}$ be this final subgroup. Let 
$$
M'=\{ L(K_{n})\mid \{K_{n}\}_{n=1}^{\infty} \text{ is a maximising sequence} \} 
$$and let 
$$
M=\{ S \in M' \mid \forall T \in M': (S\cap T=\varnothing) \text{ or }(T \leq S)\}
$$
Suppose ${} \{S_{n}\}_{n=1}^{\infty}  {}$ is a maximising sequence of ${} S \in M {}$. Therefore, $S_{n}$ is a maximising sequence of $H$, so ${} L(S_{n}) \in M' {}$, so $L(S_{n})\leq S {}$, as ${} L(S_{n}) \cap S\neq \varnothing {}$. Therefore, ${} S_{n}=S {}$ for all maximising sequences. Therefore, if ${} T < G {}$, with $S\leq T {}$, then ${} S=T {}$. Therefore, $S$ is a maximal subgroup of $H$; in fact all elements of $M$ are maximal subgroups of $H$. Therefore, $H {}$ has a maximal subgroup. 

The above proof is subtly incorrect and should really be using the language of partially ordered sets and Zorn's Lemma. A more general and correct proof is belove
b)
Since ${} |\langle r \rangle |=4 {}$, then  by Lagrange's theorem, we have that any strict superset must have an order that divides ${} |G|=8 {}$. Since any strict superset must contain more elements than ${} \langle r \rangle  {}$, then any strict superset must have order $8$, that is, it must be equal to $G {}$. Therefore, if a subgroup contains ${} \langle r \rangle  {}$, then it must either be equal to ${} \langle r \rangle  {}$ or equal to $G {}$
c) skip
17. 
a)
Let ${} G {}$ be a finitely generated group, with ${} \mathcal{S} {}$ be the set of *proper* subgroups of $G {}$,  and let ${} \mathcal{C} {}$ be a chain of subgroups in ${} \mathcal{S} {}$. First note that if ${} S,\, T \in \mathcal{C} {}$, then we have $S\geq T {}$ or $S\leq T {}$. Therefore, ${} S\cup T \in \mathcal{C} {}$ with ${} S\leq S\cup T {}$ and${} T\leq S\cup T {}$.

Observe that if $x,\, y \in \bigcup_{S \in \mathcal{C}} S=B {}$, then there exist ${} S_{1},\, S_{2} \in \mathcal{C} {}$ such that ${} x \in S_{1} {}$ and ${} y \in S_{2} {}$. Then we have ${} T=S_{1} \cup S_{2} {}$ with ${} S_{1}\leq T {}$ and ${} S_{2}\leq T {}$, so ${} x,\, y \in T {}$. Since $T {}$ is a subgroup, then ${} xy^{-1} \in T {}$, so ${} xy^{-1} \in B {}$. Therefore, ${} B {}$ is a subgroup of $G {}$.
b)
Now suppose that ${} B$ is not a proper subgroup of $G$, that is, $B=G {}$. Therefore, each generator of ${} G {}$ must be contained in a subgroup ${} S\in \mathcal{C} {}$. Let $A {}$ be a finite generating set of $G {}$, i.e. ${} |A|<\infty {}$ and ${} \langle A \rangle =G {}$. For each generator ${} g\in A {}$, there exists a subgroup ${} S_{g} \in \mathcal{C} {}$ with ${} g \in {} S_{g} {}$. Then let 
$$
S=\bigcup_{g\in A} S_{g} 
$$
Since $A$ is finite, then this is a finite intersection, so therefore it is contained in ${} \mathcal{C} {}$. Since $S$ contains $A$, then $S=G {}$. Therefore, ${} \mathcal{C} {}$ is not a chain of *proper* subsets, which is a contradiction. Therefore, $B$ is a proper subgroup of $G {}$.
c)
Therefore, for every chain, we have an upper bound, i.e. the union over the chain. Therefore, ${} \mathcal{S} {}$ must have maximal elements, by Zorn's Lemma. Therefore, every subgroup has a maximal subgroup

18. 
a)
Let ${} k,\, m \in \mathbb{Z}^{+} {}$ with $k\leq m {}$. Therefore, ${} m-k\geq 0 {}$, and if ${} z \in H_{k} {}$, then ${} z^{p^{k}}=1 {}$, so ${} 1=1^{p^{m-k}}=( z^{p^{k}} )^{p^{m-k}}$. Since ${} m-k\geq 0 {}$, then ${} p^{m-k} \in \mathbb{Z}^{+} {}$, so ${} (z^{p^{k}})^{p^{m-k}}=z^{p^{k}p^{m-k}}=z^{p^{m}} {}$. Therefore, 
$$
z^{p^{m}}=1
$$
so ${} z \in H_{m} {}$. Therefore, $H_{k}\leq H_{m} {}$. 

Conversely, let ${} k,\, m \in \mathbb{Z}^{+} {}$ with ${} k>m {}$. Note that
$$
e^{2\pi ip^{-k}} \in H_{k}
$$
As
$$
( e^{2\pi ip^{-k}} )^{p^{k}}=e^{2\pi i}=1
$$
Now 
$$
( e^{2\pi ip^{-k}} )^{p^{m}}=e^{2\pi ip^{m-k}}
$$
Since ${} m-k<0 {}$, then ${} p^{m-k}<1 {}$, so ${} e^{2\pi ip^{m-k}}\neq 1 {}$ (PBFO). Therefore, ${} H_{k}\not\leq H_{m} {}$
b) skip
c) 
Let ${} H < Z {}$. Let ${} S=\{\log_{p}(|z|) \mid z \in H\} {}$. For each ${} r \in S {}$, $H_{r}\leq H$, as