---
tags:
  - dnf_algebra
  - exercises
date: 2023-12-08
---
[[Directory]], [[D&F Abstract Algebra|Subject Directory]]
[[Abstract Algebra - David S. Dummit, Richard M. Foote.pdf#page=98|Exercise Sheet]]
1. 
Let $\varphi:G\to{}H {}$ be a homomorphism, and let $E\leq H$. Let ${} a,\, b \in \varphi ^{-1}(E) {}$. Therefore, there exist ${} x,\, y \in E {}$ with ${} \varphi(a)=x {}$ and ${} \varphi(b)=y {}$. Therefore, ${} \varphi(ab^{-1})=\varphi(a)\varphi(b)^{-1}=xy^{-1}\in E {}$. Therefore, ${} ab^{-1} \in \varphi ^{-1}(E) {}$, so $\varphi ^{-1}(E)\leq G {}$

Now suppose that ${} E\trianglelefteq H {}$. Let $g \in G {}$. Then, ${} h=\varphi(g) \in H {}$. Therefore, ${} hEh^{-1}=E {}$, as $E$ is normal. Therefore, given some ${} y \in E {}$, then ${} hyh^{-1}\in E {}$. Now let ${} a \in \varphi(E^{-1}) {}$. Then there exists some ${} x \in E {}$ with ${} \varphi(a)=x {}$. Therefore, ${} \varphi(gag^{-1})=hxh^{-1} \in E {}$, so ${} gag^{-1} \in \varphi ^{-1}(E) {}$, and ${} g\varphi ^{-1}(E)g^{-1}=E {}$. Therefore, ${} \varphi ^{-1}(E) {}$ is normal.

Now note that ${} \{ 1 \}\trianglelefteq H {}$, and ${} \varphi ^{-1}(\{ 1 \})=\ker \varphi {}$. Therefore, ${} \ker \varphi\trianglelefteq G {}$
2. 
Let $\varphi:G\to{}H {}$ a homomorphism, let ${} k=\ker \varphi {}$, and let ${} a,\, b \in \im \varphi {}$. Let ${} X,\, Y \in G/K {}$ with ${} X=\varphi ^{-1}(a) {}$ and ${} Y=\varphi ^{-1}(b) {}$. Let ${} u \in X {}$. Let ${} Z=XY=\{ xy\mid x \in X,\, y \in Y \} {}$.

Suppose that ${} Z \in G /K {}$, and ${} w \in Z {}$. Then ${} w=mn {}$, for some ${} m \in X {}$ and ${} n \in Y {}$. Then ${} \varphi(w)=ab {}$, by the multiplication in $G/K {}$, and ${} \varphi(u^{-1}w)=\varphi(u)^{-1}\varphi(w)=a^{-1}ab=b {}$. Therefore, ${} u^{-1}w \in Y {}$, by definition. Therefore, there exists some ${} v \in Y {}$ with ${} u^{-1}w=v {}$, and ${} w=uv {}$, as required.
3. skip
4. skip
5. skip
6. 
Let ${} \varphi:\mathbb{R}^{\times }\to{}\{ \pm1 \} {}$ with ${} \varphi(x)=\frac{x}{|x|} {}$. ${} \varphi ^{-1}(1)=\{ x \in \mathbb{R}\mid x>0 \} {}$, and ${} \varphi ^{-1}(-1)=\{ x \in \mathbb{R}\mid x<0 \} {}$. Let ${} x,\, y \in \mathbb{R} {}$. Then ${} \varphi(xy)=\frac{xy}{|xy|}=\frac{x}{|x|}\cdot \frac{y}{|y|}=\varphi(x)\varphi(y) {}$
7. skip
8. 
Let ${} \varphi:\mathbb{R}^{\times }\to{}\mathbb{R}^{\times } {}$ with ${} \varphi(x)=|x| {}$. ${} \varphi(xy)=|xy|=|x||y| {}$, so $\varphi$ is a homomorphism. The image of $\varphi$ is ${} \{ x \in \mathbb{R}\mid x>0 \} {}$, and the kernel of $\varphi$ is ${} \{ \pm 1 \} {}$. Given ${} x \in \im \varphi {}$, then ${} \varphi ^{-1}(x)=\{ x,\, -x \} {}$.
9. skip
10. skip
11. skip
12. skip
13. skip
14. Let $G=\mathbb{Q}/\mathbb{Z} {}$. 
a)
Let ${} q \in \mathbb{Q} {}$, and let $q\mathbb{Z}$ be a coset of $G$. Then let ${} r \in q\mathbb{Z} {}$ be a representative with ${} 0\leq r<1 {}$. First, observe that ${} 0\leq q-\floor*{q} <1 {}$, and ${} -\floor*{q}  \in \mathbb{Z} {}$, so there always exists some $r {}$. Now note that, given some other representative ${} s \in q\mathbb{Z} {}$, then there exists some ${} z \in \mathbb{Z} {}$ with ${} s=r+z {}$. Then ${} z\leq r<z+1. {}$Since ${} z$ is an integer, then these bounds cannot intersect with the bounds for $r$, unless ${} z=0 {}$, and so ${} s=r {}$. Therefore, there is exactly $1 {}$ representative in the range ${} [0,\, 1) {}$.
b)
Let ${} X \in \mathbb{Q}/\mathbb{Z} {}$. Then ${} \exists q \in \mathbb{Q} {}$ with ${} X=q+\mathbb{Z} {}$. Let $d$ be the denominator of $q {}$. Then ${} dq \in \mathbb{Z} {}$, and ${} d\cdot X=(dq)+\mathbb{Z}=\mathbb{Z} {}$ is the identity. Therefore, $X {}$ has finite order. 

Now let ${} N$ be a desired order of an element. Then let ${} q=\frac{1}{N} {}$. Now ${} N(q+\mathbb{Z})=\mathbb{Z} {}$, by above. Suppose that ${} M< N$ with ${} M(q+\mathbb{Z})=\mathbb{Z} {}$. Then ${} Mq\notin \mathbb{Z} {}$, so ${} (Mq)+\mathbb{Z}\neq \mathbb{Z}$. Therefore, ${} |q+\mathbb{Z}|=N {}$, as required
c)
Let ${} S=\{ X \in \mathbb{R}/\mathbb{Z}\mid |X|<\infty \} {}$. As shown above, then ${} \mathbb{Q} /\mathbb{Z}\subseteq S {}$. Now let ${} X \in S {}$. Then there exists some ${} x \in \mathbb{R} {}$ with $x+\mathbb{Z}=X {}$, and some ${} n \in Z {}$ with ${} nx+\mathbb{Z}=\mathbb{Z} {}$, that is, ${} nx=m {}$ for some ${} m \in \mathbb{Z} {}$. Therefore, ${} x=\frac{m}{n} {}$ for integers ${} m,\, n {}$, so ${} x \in \mathbb{R} {}$. Therefore, ${} X \in \mathbb{Q} /\mathbb{Z} {}$, so $\mathbb{Q}/\mathbb{Z}=S {}$, as required
d) skip
15. 
Let $G$ be a divisible commutative group, and let $H<G {}$ be a proper subgroup. Since $G {}$ is commutative, then $H\trianglelefteq G {}$. Let ${} n \in \mathbb{N} {}$ and ${} X \in G/H {}$. Then there exists some ${} x \in G {}$ with ${} X=xH {}$. Therefore, there exists some ${} y \in G {}$ with ${} y^{n}=x {}$, and ${} ( yH )^{n}=y^{n}H=xH {}$. Therefore, for all ${} n \in \mathbb{N} {}$, and ${} X=xH \in G /H {}$, there exists some ${} Y=yH {}$ such that ${} Y^{n}=y^{n}H=xH=X {}$, so $G/H$ is divisible. Since $\mathbb{Q}$ is divisible, then $\mathbb{Q}/\mathbb{Z} {}$ is divisible.
16. 
Let ${} G {}$ be a group, and let $N\trianglelefteq G {}$, and ${} \bar{G}=G/N {}$. Suppose ${} G=\langle S \rangle  {}$. Let ${} \pi:G\to{}\bar{G} {}$ be the natural projection. Since ${} G=\langle S \rangle  {}$, then given ${} x \in G {}$, there exist ${} s_{1},\, s_{2},\,\dots,\,s_{n} \in S \cup S^{-1} {}$, where ${} S^{-1}=\{ s^{-1}\mid s \in S \} {}$ with ${} x=s_{1} s_{2} \dots s_{n} {}$. Now ${} \pi(x)=\pi(s_{1})\pi(s_{2})\dots \pi(s_{n}) {}$. The map ${} \pi {}$ is surjective, so every element of ${} \bar{G} {}$ may be expressed as a product of elements of ${} \{ \pi(s)\mid s \in S \cup S^{-1} \} {}$. Now let ${} \bar{S}=\{ \pi(s)\mid s \in S \} {}$. Then ${} \bar{G}=\langle \bar{S} \rangle  {}$
17. skip
18. skip
19. skip
20. skip
21. skip
22. a) skip cos same in b
b)
Let ${} \mathcal{C} {}$ be a collection of normal subgroups of a group ${} G {}$, and let
$$
U=\bigcap_{N\in \mathcal{C}} N
$$
First, we know that $U$ is a subgroup of $G$. Let ${} x \in U {}$. Then for all ${} N \in \mathcal{C} {}$, we have ${} x \in N {}$. Fix some ${} N \in \mathcal{C} {}$. Therefore, since ${} N {}$ is normal, then for all ${} g \in G {}$, ${} gxg^{-1} \in N {}$. Therefore, ${} gxg^{-1} \in N {}$ for all $N$, so ${} gxg^{-1} \in U {}$. Therefore, $U$ is normal
23. 
Let ${} \mathcal{C} {}$ be a non empty collection of normal subgroups of a group $G$. Let 
$$
C=\bigcup_{N\in \mathcal{C}} N
$$
and ${} C^{-1}=\{ c^{-1}\mid c \in C \} {}$. Let ${} U=\langle C \rangle  {}$. Let ${} x \in U {}$. Then, there exist some ${} c_{1},\, c_{2},\,\dots,\,c_{n} \in C \cup C^{-1} {}$ such that ${} x=c_{1} c_{2}\dots c_{n} {}$. Let ${} g \in G {}$. Now observe that
$$
gxg^{-1}=gc_{1} c_{2}\dots c_{n} g^{-1}=gc_{1} g^{-1} gc_{2} g^{-1}\dots gc_{n} g^{-1}
$$
Since every ${} c_{1},\,\dots,\,c_{n} {}$ are elements of some normal group, then for all ${} c_{1},\,\dots,\,c_{n} {}$, there exists a normal group ${} N_{n} \in \mathcal{C} {}$ with ${} gc_{k} g^{-1} \in N_{k} {}$. Therefore, there exist some elements ${} d_{k} \in N_{k} {}$ with 
$$
gxg^{-1}=d_{1} d_{2} \dots d_{n}
$$
Therefore, ${} gxg^{-1} \in U {}$, so $U$ is normal.
24. 
Let $N\trianglelefteq G$, and let $H\leq G$. Then let ${} x \in {} N\cap H {}$. Since ${} x \in N {}$, then for all ${} g \in G {}$, ${} gxg^{-1} {}$. Therefore, ${} N\cap H {}$ is normal in $G$. Since ${} N\cap H {}$ is a subgroup of $H$, and ${} H\subseteq G {}$, then ${} N\cap H\trianglelefteq H {}$
25. a)
Let ${} N\leq G$. First, suppose that $N\trianglelefteq G$. Then ${} gNg^{-1}=N\subseteq N {}$, by definition. Conversely, suppose that for all ${} g \in G {}$, ${} gNg^{-1} \subseteq N {}$. Now let ${} n \in N {}$, and fix some ${} g \in G {}$. Then ${} g^{^{-1}}ng =m \in N {}$. Therefore, ${} n=gmg^{-1} {}$, so ${} n \in gNg^{-1} {}$. Therefore, ${} N=gNg^{-1} {}$, so $N$ is normal
b) skip
26. Let ${} a,\, b \in G {}$ a group.
a) skip
b) Let ${} g \in G {}$. Then ${} ga^{-1}g^{-1}=( gag^{-1} )^{-1} {}$
c)
Let ${} S\subseteq G {}$, and let ${} N=\langle S \rangle  {}$. Suppose that ${} gSg^{-1}\subseteq N {}$. Then given an element  ${} x \in gNg^{-1} {}$, there exist some ${} s_{1},\,\dots,\,s_{n} \in S {}$ with ${} x=gs_{1} s_{2}\dots s_{n} g^{-1}=gs_{1} g^{-1} g s_{2} g^{-1}\dots gs_{n}g^{-1} {}$. Then for all ${} 1\leq k\leq n {}$${} gs_{k} g^{-1}\in N {}$. Therefore, $x$ is a product of elements of $N$, so ${} x \in N {}$. Therefore, ${} gNg^{-1} \subseteq N {}$, so ${} N\trianglelefteq G . {}$ d) skip
e) 
Let ${} n \in \mathbb{Z}^{+} {}$, and let ${} S=\{ g \in G\mid |g|=n \} {}$, and let ${} N=\langle S \rangle  {}$. Let ${} g \in G {}$, and ${} s \in S {}$. Then ${} gsg^{-1} {}$ has order $n$, so ${} gsg^{-1} \in S\subseteq N {}$. Therefore, ${} gSg^{-1}\subseteq N {}$, so ${} N\trianglelefteq G {}$, as required
27. skip
28. skip
29. skip
30. 
Let $N\leq G$, and let ${} g \in G {}$. Suppose ${} gN=Ng {}$. Then for all ${} n \in N {}$, there exists some ${} m \in N {}$ with ${} gn=mg {}$. Therefore, ${} gng^{-1}=m \in N {}$. Therefore, $g$ normalises $N$, so ${} g \in N_{G}(N) {}$.

Conversely, suppose ${} g \in N_{G}(N) {}$. Then ${} gNg^{-1}=N {}$, so given some ${} n \in N {}$ there exists some ${} m \in N {}$ with ${} gng^{-1}=m {}$. Therefore, ${} gn=mg {}$, so, if ${} k=gn \in gN {}$, then ${} k \in Ng {}$, and vice versa, so ${} gN=Ng {}$. 
31. 
Let $G {}$ a group, ${} H\leq G {}$, and $N\trianglelefteq G$. Then for all ${} g \in G {}$, ${} gNg^{-1}=N {}$. Therefore, ${} g \in N_{G}(N) {}$. Therefore, $G\leq N_{G}(N)$ and $N_{G}(N)\leq G$, so $N_{G}(N)=G {}$. Therefore, $H\leq N_{G}(N) {}$. We skip the rest
32. skip
33. skip
34. skip
35. 
Let ${} A \in SL_{n}(F) {}$, and let ${} G \in GL_{n}(F) {}$. Then 
$$
\det(GAG^{-1})=\det(G)\det (A)\det(G^{-1})=\det (G)\cdot \frac{1}{\det (G)}=1
$$
Therefore, ${} GAG^{-1} \in SL_{n}(F) {}$, so ${} SL_{n}(F)\trianglelefteq GL_{n}(F) {}$. Now let
$$
G=GL_{n}(F) /SL_{n}(F)
$$
Let ${} X \in G {}$. Take representatives ${} A,\, B \in X {}$. Then ${} A=BS {}$ for some ${} S \in SL_{n}(F) {}$. Therefore, ${} \det (A)=\det(BS)=\det(B) {}$. Conversely, consider ${} A,\, B \in GL_{n}(F) {}$ with ${} \det (A)=\det(B) {}$. Then ${} \det(AB^{-1})=1 {}$, so ${} AB^{-1}=S {}$ for some ${} S\in SL_{n}(F) {}$. Therefore, $A=BS {}$, so there exists some ${} X=A\,SL_{n}(F) \in G {}$ with ${} A,\, B \in X {}$. 

Now let ${} f:G\to{}F^{\times } {}$. Given ${} X \in G {}$, take ${} A \in X {}$. Then let ${} f(X)=\det (A) {}$. By above, this is well defined, as all elements of $X$ have the same determinant. Now note that for all ${} x \in F {}$, there exists a matrix with determinant $x$, specifically, $xI$, where $I$ is the identity matrix. Therefore, there exists a coset containing that matrix, so $f$ is surjective. Now suppose that ${} f(X)=f(Y) {}$. Then we have 2 matrices with the same determinant. We showed above that these matrices must be contained in the same coset, so $X=Y {}$. Therefore, $f$ is surjective. Finally, ${} f(XY)=\det(AB) {}$ for some ${} A \in X,\, B \in Y {}$. So ${} f(XY)=\det(AB)=\det(A)\det(B)=f(X)f(Y) {}$. Therefore, $f$ is an isomorphism, and
$$
GL_{n}(F)/SL_{n}(F)\cong F^{\times }
$$
36. 
Let $G$ a group. Suppose ${} G /Z(G) {}$ is cyclic. Then ${} G/Z(G)=\langle xZ(G) \rangle  {}$ for some ${} x \in G {}$. Given an element ${} g \in G {}$, ${} g \in x^{a}Z(G) {}$ for some ${} a \in \mathbb{Z} {}$. Then ${} g=x^{a}z {}$ for some ${} z \in Z(G) {}$. Therefore, given ${} g,\, h \in G {}$, there exist ${} a,\, b \in \mathbb{Z} {}$ and ${} z,\, w \in Z(G) {}$ with ${} g=x^{a}z {}$ and ${} h=x^{b}w {}$. Therefore, 
$$
\begin{align}
gh=x^{a}zx^{b}w=x^{a}x^{b}wz=x^{b}wx^{a}z=hg
\end{align}
$$
so $G$ is commutative.
37. 
Let ${} A,\, B {}$ be groups. Let ${} H=\{ (a,\, 1)\mid a \in A \} {}$. Let ${} g \in A\times B {}$, and let ${} h \in H {}$. Then ${} ghg^{-1}=(x,\, y)(a,\, 1)(x^{-1},\, y^{-1})=(xax^{-1},\, 1) {}$. Since $A$ is a group, then ${} xax^{-1} \in A {}$, so ${} ghg^{-1} \in H {}$. Therefore, ${} H\trianglelefteq A\times B {}$. 

Now let ${} G=A\times B /H {}$. Let $f:G\to{}B {}$. Given ${} X \in H {}$, then let ${} x=(a,\, b) \in X {}$ a representative of $X$. Then let ${} f(X)=b {}$. This is well defined, as if ${} x,\, y \in X {}$, then ${} xy^{-1}=h {}$ for some ${} h \in H {}$. Therefore, ${} (a,\, b)(c^{-1},\, d^{-1})=(k,\, 1) {}$, Therefore, ${} bd^{-1}=1 {}$, or ${} b=d {}$. 

Now let ${} b \in B {}$. There exists some ${} a \in A {}$  with ${} (a,\, b) \in A\times B {}$, and this element is in a coset. Therefore, there exists some coset ${} X \in  G {}$ with ${} f(X)=b {}$, so $f {}$ is surjective Now suppose ${} X,\, Y \in G {}$ with ${} f(X)=f(Y). {}$ Then there exist ${} (a,\, b) \in X {}$ and ${} (c,\, d) \in Y {}$ with ${} b=d {}$. But then ${} (a,\, b)(c^{-1},\, d^{-1}) \in H {}$, so they are members of the same coset. Therefore, ${} X=Y {}$, so $f$ is injective. Finally, consider ${} (a,\, b) \in XY {}$. Then ${} b {}=f(X)f(Y) {}$. Therefore, ${} f(XY)=b=f(X)f(Y) {}$, so $f$ is an isomorphism. Therefore, 
$$
(A\times B)/H\cong B
$$
38. skip
39. skip
40. 
Let $G$ be a group, and let ${} N\trianglelefteq G{} {}$. Let ${} \bar{G}=G/N {}$. Suppose ${} \bar{x}\bar{y}=\bar{y}\bar{x} {}$. Then ${} xyN=yxN {}$, so there exist ${} m,\, n \in N {}$ with ${} xyn=yxm {}$. Therefore, ${} xy=yxmn {}$, so ${} x^{-1}y^{-1}xy=mn \in N {}$. 

Conversely, suppose that ${} x^{-1}y^{-1}xy\in N {}$. Then ${} x^{-1}y^{-1}xy=n {}$ for some ${} n \in N {}$. Therefore, ${} xy=yxn {}$, so there exists a coset containing both $xy {}$ and $yx$. Therefore, ${} xyN=yxN {}$, so ${} \bar{x}\bar{y}=\bar{y}\bar{x} {}$

42. 
Let ${} H\trianglelefteq G$ and $K\trianglelefteq G$. with ${} H\cap K=\{ 1 \} {}$. Let ${} h \in H {}$ and let ${} k \in K {}$. Then ${} hkh^{-1}\in K {}$, so ${} hkh^{-1}k^{-1} \in K {}$. We also see that ${} kh^{-1}k^{-1} \in H {}$, so ${} hkh^{-1}k^{-1} \in H {}$. Since ${} H\cap K=\{ 1 \} {}$, then ${} hkh^{-1}k^{-1}=1 {}$. Therefore, ${} hk=kh {}$.
41. 
Let $G {}$ be a group. Let ${} N=\langle x^{-1}y^{-1}xy\mid x,\, y \in G \rangle {}$. Let ${} g \in G {}$, and let ${} xyx^{-1}y^{-1} {}$ be a generator of $N$. Then 
$$
gxyx^{-1}y^{-1}g^{-1}= gxg^{-1}gyg^{-1}gx^{-1}g^{-1}gy^{-1}g^{-1}=(gxg^{-1})(gyg^{-1})(gxg^{-1})^{-1}(gyg^{-1})^{-1} \in N
$$
Therefore, the set of generators are normalised by the elements of $G$, so $N$ is a normal subgroup. 

