---
tags:
  - dnf_algebra
  - exercises
date: 2023-12-14
---
[[Directory]], [[D&F Abstract Algebra|Subject Directory]]
[[Abstract Algebra - David S. Dummit, Richard M. Foote.pdf#page=119|Exercise Sheet]]
1. 
Let $G$ be a abelian simple group. Therefore, if $H\leq G$, then $H\trianglelefteq G$, so $H=G {}$ or ${} H=1 {}$. Therefore, given a non-identity element ${} q \in G {}$, then ${} \langle q \rangle =G {}$, so $G$ is cyclic. If $G$ is infinite, then $G\cong \mathbb{Z}$, but ${} 2\mathbb{Z} \trianglelefteq \mathbb{Z} {}$. so $G$ is not infinite. Therefore, $G$ is a cyclic group of order ${} p=|q| {}$. 

Now suppose that ${} p$ is composite. Then there exists some ${} a,\, b \in \mathbb{N} {}$, ${} a,\, b\neq 1,\, p {}$ with ${} ab=p {}$. Therefore, there exists a non-trivial subgroup of order $a$. But this subgroup would be normal in $G$, so we have a contradiction. Therefore, $p {}$ is prime, and ${} G\cong \mathbb{Z}_{p} {}$ for some prime $p {}$
2. 
$$
Q_{8} \trianglerighteq \langle i \rangle \trianglerighteq \langle -1 \rangle \trianglerighteq1 \text{ with factors } Q_{8} / \langle i \rangle \cong \mathbb{Z}_{2},\, \langle i \rangle /\langle -1 \rangle \cong \mathbb{Z}_{2},\, \langle -1 \rangle /1 \cong \mathbb{Z}_{2}
$$
$$
Q_{8} \trianglerighteq \langle j \rangle \trianglerighteq \langle -1 \rangle \trianglerighteq1 \text{ with factors } Q_{8} / \langle j \rangle \cong \mathbb{Z}_{2},\, \langle j \rangle /\langle -1 \rangle \cong \mathbb{Z}_{2},\, \langle -1 \rangle /1 \cong \mathbb{Z}_{2}
$$
$$
Q_{8} \trianglerighteq \langle k \rangle \trianglerighteq \langle -1 \rangle \trianglerighteq1 \text{ with factors } Q_{8} / \langle k \rangle \cong \mathbb{Z}_{2},\, \langle k \rangle /\langle -1 \rangle \cong \mathbb{Z}_{2},\, \langle -1 \rangle /1 \cong \mathbb{Z}_{2}
$$
and
$$
D_{8}\trianglerighteq \langle r \rangle \trianglerighteq \langle r^{2} \rangle \trianglerighteq 1 \text{ with factors } D_{8}/\langle r \rangle \cong \mathbb{Z}_{2},\, \langle r \rangle /\langle r^{2} \rangle \cong \mathbb{Z}_{2},\, \langle r^{2} \rangle /1\cong \mathbb{Z}_{2}
$$
$$
\begin{align}
 D_{8} &  \trianglerighteq \langle s,\, r^{2} \rangle \trianglerighteq \langle s \rangle \trianglerighteq 1   \\
D_{8}  & \trianglerighteq \langle s,\, r^{2} \rangle \trianglerighteq \langle r^{2}s \rangle \trianglerighteq1 \\
D_{8} & \trianglerighteq \langle s,\, r^{2} \rangle \trianglerighteq \langle r^{2} \rangle \trianglerighteq1 \\
D_{8} & \trianglerighteq \langle rs,\, r^{2} \rangle \trianglerighteq \langle r^{3}s \rangle \trianglerighteq1 \\
D_{8} & \trianglerighteq \langle rs ,\, r^{2} \rangle \trianglerighteq \langle rs \rangle \trianglerighteq1 \\
D_{8}  & \trianglerighteq \langle rs,\, r^{2} \rangle  \trianglerighteq \langle r^{2} \rangle \trianglerighteq 1
 \end{align}
$$
4. 
Let $G$ be a finite abelian group of order $n {}$. Suppose that, for all subgroups of order less than $n {}$, the statement holds. We have seen that if ${} n$ is prime, then if ${} H\leq G {}$, then ${} |H|=1 {}$, or ${} |H|=n {}$, so the statement holds. 

Now if we assume that $n$ is not prime, then ${} n=pa {}$ for some ${} a \in \mathbb{N} {}$, with $p$ prime. Therefore, by Cauchy's Theorem, there exists a subgroup of order $p$, call it $P$. Since $G {}$ is abelian, then $P\trianglelefteq G {}$. Now ${} G / P {}$ has order $a$. Since ${} a< n {}$, then ${} G /P {}$ has a subgroup of order $k {}$ for every divisor ${} k {}$ of $a$. By the lattice isomorphism theorem, then there is a subgroup of ${} G$ of order $pk {}$ for every ${} k \mid a {}$. 

Now since these subgroups have order ${} kp<n {}$, then the statement holds for each of these subgroups. Therefore for every ${} k\neq a$ with ${} k\mid a {}$, and for every ${} \ell\mid kp {}$ there exists a (not necessarily distinct) subgroup of ${} G {}$ with order $\ell$. Now if $q\mid n$, then there exists some ${} k\mid a {}$ and some $\ell \mid kp {}$ such that $\ell =q {}$, so there exists a subgroup of order $q$. Therefore, by induction, for every divisor $k\mid n$, there exists a subgroup of order $k {}$.
5. 
First we prove a useful lemma:
#### Lemma:
If $G {}$ is a group with subgroups ${} K_{1},\, K_{2}\leq G {}$ such that ${} K_{1}\trianglelefteq K_{2} {}$, ${} K_{2} / K_{1} {}$ is abelian, then if ${} N\trianglelefteq G {}$, and $H\leq G {}$, we have
1. ${} K_{1}\cap H\trianglelefteq K_{2} \cap H {}$
2. ${} (K_{2} \cap H) / (K_{1} \cap H) {}$ is abelian
##### Proof:
1. 
We have ${} K_{1} \cap H \leq K_{2} \cap H {}$. Now let ${} g \in K_{2}\cap H {}$, and let ${} x \in K_{1} \cap H {}$. Then ${} g \in K_{2} {}$ and ${} x \in K_{1} {}$, so ${} gxg^{-1} \in K_{1} {}$. But ${} g \in H {}$ and ${} x \in H {}$, so ${} gxg^{-1} \in H {}$. Therefore, ${} gxg^{-1} \in K_{1} \cap H {}$, so ${} K_{1} \cap H \trianglelefteq K_{2} \cap H {}$. 
2. 
Let ${} X,\, Y \in (K_{2} \cap N) / (K_{1} \cap N) {}$. Then ${} X=x(K_{1} \cap H) {}$ and ${} Y=y(K_{1}\cap H) {}$, for some ${} x,\, y \in K_{2} \cap H {}$. Then 
$$
XY=xyK_{1}\cap xyH
$$
Since ${} K_{2} / K_{1} {}$ is abelian, and ${} x,\, y \in K_{2} {}$, then ${} yx \in xyK_{1} {}$. Now since ${} x,\, y \in H {}$, then ${} yx \in H {}$. Therefore, 
$$
XY=yx G_{k} \cap yxH = YX
$$
So ${} {} (K_{2} \cap H) / (K_{1} \cap H) {} {}$ is abelian.

Let ${} G$ be a solvable group. Let $H\leq G$. Then there exist ${} G_{1},\,\dots,\,G_{n}\leq G {}$ with
$$
1=G_{1} \trianglelefteq G_{2} \trianglelefteq \dots\trianglelefteq G_{n}=G
$$
and ${} G_{k+1} /G_{k} {}$ abelian. Now by the lemma,
$$
1 = G_{1} \cap H \trianglelefteq G_{2} \cap H \trianglelefteq \dots \trianglelefteq G_{n} \cap H =H
$$
and by the lemma, ${} (G_{k+1} \cap H) / (G_{k} \cap H) {}$ is abelian. Therefore, ${} H {}$ is solvable. 

Let ${} \pi:G\to{}G /N {}$ be the natural projection. Then let ${} \conj{G_{k}}=\pi(G_{k}) {}$. Now given ${} \conj{g} \in \bar{G_{k+1}} {}$, and ${} \conj{x} \in \bar{G_{k}} {}$, then there exist ${} g \in G_{k+1} {}$ and $x \in G_{k}$ with ${} \pi(g)=\bar{g} {}$ and ${} \pi(x)=\bar{x} {}$. Then ${} \bar{g}\bar{x}\bar{g}^{-1}=\pi(g)\pi(x)\pi(g)^{-1}=\pi(gxg^{-1}) {}$. Since ${} gxg^{-1} \in G_{k} {}$, as it is normal in ${} G_{k+1} {}$, then ${} \pi(gxg^{-1}) \in \conj{G {}_{k}} {}$. Therefore, ${} \bar{G_{k}}\trianglelefteq \bar{G_{k+1}} {}$. 

Now let ${} X,\, Y \in \bar{G_{k+1}}/\conj{G_{k}}  {}$. Then there exist ${} \conj{x},\, \conj{y} \in \bar{G_{k+1}} {}$ with ${} X=\bar{x} \bar{G_{k}} {}$ and ${} Y=\bar{y} \bar{G_{k}} {}$. Now ${} X=\pi(x G_{k}) {}$ and ${} Y=\pi(y G_{k}) {}$. Therefore, since ${} G_{k+1} / G_{k} {}$ is abelian, then
$$
XY=\pi(xG_{k})\pi(yG_{k})=\pi(xyG_{k})=\pi(yxG_{k})=\pi(yG_{k})\pi(xG_{k})=YX
$$
Therefore, ${} \conj{G_{k+1}} / \bar{G_{k}} {}$ is abelian.
6. 
Let $G$ be a finite group with order $n\neq 1$. Now suppose that every group of order $k< n$ has a composition series. Now if $G$ is simple, then we are done, as
$$
1\trianglelefteq G
$$
is a composition series. Otherwise, there exists a non-trivial normal subgroup $N\trianglelefteq G$. Both ${} \bar{G}=G /N {}$ and $N$ have composition series, as they both have orders strictly less than $n$. Let 
$$
1\trianglelefteq N_{1} \trianglelefteq N_{2} \trianglelefteq_{}\dots\trianglelefteq N_{a}=N  
$$
be the composition series for $N$, and let
$$
\bar{N}=1 \trianglelefteq \bar{G_{1}} \trianglelefteq \bar{G_{2}} \trianglelefteq_{}\dots\trianglelefteq \bar{G_{b}}=\bar{G}
$$
be the composition series for ${} \bar{G} {}$. Then there exist a sequence of subgroups ${} N\trianglelefteq{} G_{1}\trianglelefteq_{}\dots\trianglelefteq G {}$ where ${} \conj{G_{k}}=G_{k} /N {}$, by the correspondence theorem. Since ${} \bar{G_{k+1}} /\bar{G_{k}} {}$ is simple, then 
$$
\bar{G_{k+1}} / \bar{G_{k}}=(G_{k+1} /N) / (G_{k} / N)\cong G_{k+1} / G_{k}
$$
is simple. Therefore, 
$$
1\trianglelefteq N_{1}\trianglelefteq_{}\dots\trianglelefteq N_{a}=N\trianglelefteq G_{1}\trianglelefteq_{}\dots\trianglelefteq G
$$
is a composition series, as ${} G_{1} /N {}$ is simple, and ${} N / N_{a-1} {}$ is simple, and all others are simple.
7. skip
8. 
(i $\Rightarrow {}$ ii) 
Let $G$ be a solvable finite group of order $n$. Then assume for induction that every solvable group of order $k<n {}$ has a normal chain of subgroups whose subsequent quotients are cyclic. 

First, suppose $G {}$ is simple. Then the only possible sequence of normal subgroups is ${} 1 \trianglelefteq G {}$ with ${} G / 1 \cong G {}$ is abelian. Therefore, ${} G {}$ is an abelian finite simple group, so $G {}$ is cyclic, in particular, ${} G\cong \mathbb{Z}_{p} {}$ for some $p {}$ prime.

Now $G {}$ is not simple, so there exists a normal subgroup ${} N\trianglelefteq G {}$. Let ${} \bar{G}=G /N  {}$. Both ${} N {}$ and ${} \bar{G} {}$ both have order less than $G {}$, and are both solvable so there exist
$$
1 =N_{0}\trianglelefteq N_{1} \trianglelefteq \dots \trianglelefteq N_{a} =N
$$
with ${} N_{k+1} / N_{k}  {}$ cyclic, and
$$
\bar{1}=N=\bar{G_{0}}\trianglelefteq \bar{G_{1}}\trianglelefteq_{}\dots\trianglelefteq \bar{G_{b}}=\bar{G}
$$
With ${} \bar{G_{k+1}} /\bar{G_{k}} {}$ cyclic. By the correspondence theorem, then there exist $G_{0},\,\dots,\,G_{b}\leq G {}$ with
$$
N=G_{0}\trianglelefteq G_{1}\leq_{}\dots\trianglelefteq G_{b}=G
$$
and ${} G_{k+1} / G_{k} \cong  (G_{k+1} / N) / (G_{k} / N) =\bar{G_{k+1}}/\bar{G_{k}}  {}$ is cyclic. Therefore, we can form
$$
1=N_{0}\trianglelefteq N_{1} \trianglelefteq_{}\dots \trianglelefteq N_{a}=N=G_{0} \trianglelefteq G_{1}\trianglelefteq_{}\dots\trianglelefteq G_{b}=G
$$
With subsequent quotients cyclic. 
(ii ${} \Rightarrow {}$ iii)
Let $G {}$ be a finite group of order $n {}$ with a chain
$$
1 = H_{0} \trianglelefteq H_{1} \trianglelefteq \dots \trianglelefteq H_{s} =G
$$
with ${} H_{k+1} / H_{k} {}$ cyclic. Suppose that for every finite group satisfying the above condition with order ${} k<n {}$, we have that the composition factors of that group are of prime order. 

First suppose that $G {}$ is simple. Then the only chain is ${} 1\trianglelefteq G {}$, so $G$ is cyclic. Therefore, $G$ is abelian, so $G$ is a finite simply abelian group, so $G\cong Z_{p}$ for some prime $p$. 

Therefore, $G$ is not simple, and there exists some non-trivial ${} N\trianglelefteq G$. Let ${} \bar{G}=G /N {}$. Since ${} |G /N|<n, {}$ and ${} |N|<n {}$ then there exist
$$
1=N_{0} \trianglelefteq N_{1}\trianglelefteq_{}\dots\trianglelefteq N_{a} = N
$$
with ${} N_{k+1} / N_{k}\cong \mathbb{Z}_{p_{k}} {}$ for some prime ${} p_{k}$, and
$$
\bar{1}=N=\bar{G_{0}}\trianglelefteq \bar{G_{1}}\trianglelefteq_{}\dots\trianglelefteq \bar{G_{b}}=G
$$
with ${} \conj{G_{k+1}} / \bar{G_{k}}\cong \mathbb{Z}_{p_{k}} {}$ for some prime $p_{k}$. Therefore, by the correspondence theorem, there exist subgroups $G_{0},\,\dots,\,G_{b}\leq G {}$ with 
$$
N=G_{0}\trianglelefteq G_{1}\trianglelefteq_{}\dots\trianglelefteq G_{b}=G
$$
and ${} G_{k+1}/G_{k} \cong (G_{k+1} /N) / (G_{k} /N)=\bar{G_{k+1}} / \bar{G_{k}}\cong \mathbb{Z}_{p_{k}} {}$ for some prime ${} p_{k} {}$. Therefore, we can compose these sequences to make
$$
1=N_{0}\trianglelefteq N_{1}\trianglelefteq_{}\dots\trianglelefteq N_{a}=N=G_{0}\trianglelefteq G_{1}\trianglelefteq_{}\dots\trianglelefteq G_{b}=G
$$
with the quotients of subsequent terms being isomorphic to ${} \mathbb{Z}_{p_{k}}$ for some prime ${} p_{k} {}$. Since ${} \mathbb{Z}_{p_{k}}$ is simple, then this is a composition series, and these are it's composition factors.
(iii $\Rightarrow {}$iv) skip (solution seems dumb and weird idk) #todo
(iv ${} \Rightarrow {}$i)
Let $G$ be a finite group with a chain
$$
1=N_{0}\trianglelefteq N_{1}\trianglelefteq\dots \trianglelefteq N_{a}=G
$$
with ${} N_{k+1} /N_{k} {}$ abelian, and $N_{k}\trianglelefteq G {}$. Therefore, by definition, ${} G {}$ is solvable, as it has a normal chain with subsequent quotients abelian
9. 
Let $G$ be finite, with
$$
1=N_{0}\trianglelefteq N_{1}\trianglelefteq_{}\dots\trianglelefteq N_{r}=G \quad\text{ and} \quad 1=M_{0}\trianglelefteq M_{1}\trianglelefteq M_{2}=G
$$
with ${} N_{k+1} /N_{k} {}$ simple, and ${} M_{k+1} / M_{k} {}$ simple. Assume that $M_{1} {}$ and ${} N_{r-1} {}$ are non trivial, as otherwise, ${} G$ is simple, so ${} N_{k}$ with $k\neq r$ is trivial. Now consider ${} M_{1} N_{r-1} {}$. Since both are normal subgroups of ${} G, {}$ then $N_{1} M_{r-1}\trianglelefteq G {}$. Now consider the series
$$
1 \trianglelefteq N_{r-1} \trianglelefteq M_{1} N_{r-1} \trianglelefteq G
$$
Note that ${} N_{r-1}\trianglelefteq G {}$ and ${} N_{r-1}\trianglelefteq M_{1} N_{r-1} {}$. Now consider the quotient
$$
\begin{align}
 G / M_{1} N_{r-1}  & \cong   (G / N_{r-1}) / (M_{1} N_{r-1} / N_{r-1}) \\
 & \cong (G / N_{r-1}) / (M_{1} / (M_{1} \cap N_{r-1}))
 \end{align}
$$
Now since ${} G / N_{r-1} {}$ is simple, then either ${} M_{1} /(M_{1} \cap N_{r-1})\cong 1 {}$, or ${} M_{1} /(M_{1} \cap N_{r-1})\cong G / N_{r-1} {}$.

Case 1: ${} M_{1} /(M_{1} \cap N_{r-1})\cong G / N_{r-1} {}$
Then ${} G / M_{1} N_{r-1}\cong 1 {}$, so ${} G= M_{1} N_{r-1} {}$. Now also note that since $M_{1}$ is simple, then ${} M_{1} \cap N_{r-1}=1 {}$ or ${} M_{1} \cap N_{r-1}=M_{1} {}$. If ${} M_{1} \cap N_{r-1}=M_{1} {}$, then ${} M_{1} N_{r-1}=N_{r-1}=G {}$, which is a contradiction, as ${} N_{r-1} {}$ is non-trivial. Therefore, ${} M_{1} \cap N_{r-1}=1 {}$. Now
$$
\begin{align}
 G / M_{1}  & =   M_{1} N_{r-1} / M_{1} \\
 & \cong  N_{r-1} / (M_{1} \cap N_{r-1}) \\
 & \cong  N_{r-1}
 \end{align}
$$
Since ${} G /M_{1} {}$ is simple, then ${} N_{r-1} {}$ is simple.

Case 2: ${} M_{1} / (M_{1} \cap N_{r-1})\cong 1 {}$. 
Then ${} M_{1} \cap N_{r-1}=M_{1} {}$, so ${} M_{1}N_{r-1}=N_{r-1} {}$, and ${} M_{1} \trianglelefteq N_{r-1} {}$. Then
$$
\begin{align}
 G / M_{1} N_{r-1} & =G / N_{r-1}   \\
 & \cong (G / M_{1}) / (N_{r-1} / M_{1})
 \end{align}
$$
Since ${} G / M_{1} {}$ is simple, then either ${} N_{r-1} / M_{1} \cong G / M_{1} {}$, which would mean that ${} |N_{r-1}|=|G| {}$, but ${} N_{r-1} {}$ is non-trivial, so this is not the case. Therefore, we take the other option, ${} N_{r-1} / M_{1}\cong 1 {}$, and ${} N_{r-1}=M_{1} {}$. Therefore, ${} N_{r-1} {}$ is simple, as $M_{1}$ is simple.

In both cases, ${} N_{r-1} {}$ is simple, so it is the last non-trivial subgroup in the chain. Therefore, ${} r=2 {}$, and ${} N_{r-1}=N_{1} {}$. Now we have that either $N_{1}=M_{1} {}$, or ${} N_{1} \cong  G/M_{1} {}$. We have 2 cases:
Case 1: ${} N_{1}=M_{1} {}$, and ${} G / N_{1}=G / M_{1} {}$, so both sequences have the same composition factors, or
Case 2: ${} N_{1} \cong  G/ M_{1} {}$. Then ${} G / M_{1} \cong  N_{1} {}$, as shown above, so each sequence has the factor $M_{1} {}$ and $N_{1}. {}$ 
10. 
Let $G {}$ be a group with the series
$$
1=N_{0}\trianglelefteq N_{1} \trianglelefteq \dots \trianglelefteq N_{r}=G\quad \text{ and } \quad 1=M_{0}\trianglelefteq M_{1} \trianglelefteq_{}\dots\trianglelefteq M_{s} =G
$$
which are both composition series, with each inclusion of the chain proper. Let ${} n=\min(s,\, r) {}$. Now assume by induction that all groups with a composition series of length ${} k<n {}$ have unique factors up to order. 

Now if ${} n=1 {}$, then $G$ is simple, and ${} r=s=1 {}$, and the composition factors in both cases is just ${} G {}$.

Otherwise, ${} n>1 {}$, so ${} N_{r-1}\lhd G {}$ and ${} M_{s-1} \lhd G {}$. Consider the subgroup ${} H=N_{r-1} \cap M_{s-1} {}$. Then ${} H \lhd G {}$, ${} H \lhd N_{r-1} {}$, and ${} H \lhd M_{s-1} {}$. Also note that the subgroup ${} N_{r-1} M_{s-1} {}$ is normal in $G {}$. Consider the quotient
$$
\begin{align}
 G / N_{r-1} M_{s-1}  & \cong (G / N_{r-1})   / (N_{r-1} M_{s-1} / N_{r-1}) \\
 & \cong  (G  / N_{r-1}) / (M_{s-1} / (M_{s-1} \cap N_{r-1})) \\
 \\
 & \cong (G / M_{s-1}) / (N_{r-1} M_{s-1} / N_{r-1}) \\
 & \cong  (G/ N_{r-1}) / (N_{r-1} / (M_{s-1} \cap N_{r-1}))
 \end{align}
$$
Since ${} G / N_{r-1} {}$ is simple, then either
$$
\begin{align}
 M_{s-1} / H  & \cong  G / N_{r-1} \ \text{ or}   \\
M_{s-1} / H  & \cong 1
 \end{align}
$$
and since ${} G / M_{s-1} {}$ is simple, then either
$$
\begin{align}
 N_{r-1} / H  & \cong  G / M_{s-1} \ \text{ or}   \\
N_{r-1} / H  & \cong 1
 \end{align}
$$
Case 1: ${} M_{s-1} / H\cong 1 {}$
If ${} M_{s-1} /H \cong  1 {}$, then ${} H\cong M_{s-1} {}$, so if ${} N_{r-1} / H \cong G / M_{s-1} {}$, then 
$$
N_{r-1} / M_{s-1} \cong G / M_{s-1} \Rightarrow  N_{r-1} =G
$$
Which is a contradiction. Therefore, ${} N_{r-1} /H\cong 1 {}$, so ${} M_{s-1} / H \cong 1 \Rightarrow N_{r-1} / H \cong 1 {}$. Via symmetry, then likewise ${} N_{r-1} / H\cong 1\Rightarrow M_{s-1} / H\cong 1 {}$. Therefore, ${} H=M_{s-1} = N_{r-1} {}$. 

WLOG, suppose $s\leq r$. Then ${} M_{s-1} {}$ has a composition sequence of length ${} n-1<n {}$, and since $N_{r-1}=M_{s-1} {}$, the composition series ${} N_{r-1} \rhd N_{r-2} \rhd \dots \rhd N_{0}=1 {}$ must have length ${} n-1 {}$, and must have the same composition factors up to permutation as the composition factors of ${} M_{s-1} \rhd M_{s-2} \rhd_{}\dots\rhd M_{0}=1 {}$. Therefore, the composition factors of the two sequences given above are the same.

Case 2: ${} M_{s-1} / H \cong G /N_{r-1} {}$
Suppose that ${} N_{r-1} / H \cong 1 {}$. Then ${} H=N_{r-1} {}$, and $M$
$$
M_{s-1} / N_{r-1} \cong  G / N_{r-1} \Rightarrow  M_{s-1} \cong  G
$$
which is a contradiction. Therefore, ${} N_{r-1} /H\cong G / M_{s-1} {}$. Now we have 
$$
G / M_{s-1} N_{r-1} \cong  (G / N_{r-1}) / (M_{s-1} / H) \cong  1
$$
So ${} M_{s-1} N_{r-1} = G {}$. 
WLOG suppose that $s\leq r {}$. Now since ${} H \lhd M_{s-1} {}$, then there exists a composition chain of ${} M_{s-1} {}$ containing $H$. Therefore, $H {}$ has a composition chain of length ${} a < n-1 <n {}$. Therefore, for any composition chain of $H$, they all have the same length, and the composition factors are unique up to permutation. Let
$$
H =H_{a}\rhd H_{a-1}\rhd \dots \rhd H_{1} \rhd H_{0} = 1
$$
be a composition series of ${} H {}$. Now we have that
$$
G = M_{s-1} N_{r-1} \rhd N_{r-1} \rhd H =H_{a}\rhd H_{a-1} \rhd \dots \rhd H_{0}=1
$$
Is a composition chain of $G {}$, and so is 
$$
G = M_{s-1} N_{r-1} \rhd M_{s-1} \rhd H =H_{a}\rhd H_{a-1} \rhd \dots \rhd H_{0}=1
$$
as 
$$
M_{s-1} / H \cong  G /  N_{r-1} \text{ is simple}
$$
and
$$
N_{r-1} / H \cong  G /  M_{s-1} \text{ is simple}
$$
Now we have that ${} N_{r-1} {}$ has a composition series with ${} a+ 1\leq n-1 <n {}$ elements, so ${} r=s {}$. Now consider the composition series
$$
\begin{align}
G /H  & \rhd N_{r-1} /H \rhd H /H \cong 1 \\
G / H &  \rhd M_{s-1} /H \rhd H/H \cong 1
\end{align}
$$
These are composition series as
$$
N_{r-1} /H \cong  G / M_{s-1} \text{ is simple}
$$
and 
$$
M_{s-1} / H \cong  G / N_{r-1} \text{ is simple}
$$
Since these are 2 composition series of length 2 of the same group, then by above, the set of their composition factors must be the same. Now we have that the composition factors of $H {}$ are equivalent up to permutation, and by the correspondence theorem, the composition factors of
$$
G \rhd N_{r-1} \rhd H
$$
and
$$
G \rhd M_{s-1} \rhd H
$$
are equivalent up to permutation, therefore, the composition factors of $G$ are equivalent up to permutation. 
11. 
Let $G$ be a solvable group, and let ${} [G,\, G]$ denote the commutator subgroup of $G$. Then there exists some $N \lhd G {}$ (specifically $N\neq G$) with ${} G /N {}$ abelian. Therefore, ${} [G,\, G]\leq N\lhd G {}$, so ${} [G,\, G]\neq G {}$. 

Now let $N \trianglelefteq G {}$. Then let ${} g \in G {}$, and observe that given ${} x,\, y \in N {}$, since $N {}$ is normal we have ${} a,\, b \in N {}$ with ${} gxg^{-1}=a {}$ and ${} gyg^{-1}=b {}$, so we have
$$
\begin{align}
 g[N,\, N]g^{-1} & = \langle  \{ gxyx^{-1}y^{-1}g^{-1} \mid x,\, y \in N \}  \rangle  \\
 & =\langle \{ gxg^{-1}gyg^{-1}gx^{-1}g^{-1}gy^{-1}g^{-1} \mid x,\, y \in N \} \rangle  \\
 & =\langle \{ aba^{-1}b^{-1} \mid a,\,b \in N \} \rangle  \\
 & =N
 \end{align}
$$
so ${} [N,\, N] \trianglelefteq G {}$.

Let ${} G^{(k)} {}$ be defined recursively, with ${} G^{(0)}=G {}$, and ${} G^{(k)}=[G^{(k-1)},\, G^{(k-1)}] {}$. Now by above each ${} G^{(k)}\trianglelefteq G {}$, and ${} G^{(k)}\rhd G^{(k+1)} {}$. Call the chain ${} \{ G^{(k)} \mid k \in \mathbb{N} \} {}$ a derived sequence, and ${} G^{(k)} {}$ the $k^{\text{th}} {}$ derived subgroup. Call ${} [N,\, N]$ the derived subgroup of $N$. 

Now let $G {}$ be a solvable group. Then there exists a solving series, i.e.
$$
G = N_{0} \rhd N_{1} \rhd N_{2} \rhd\dots \rhd N_{r}= 1
$$
with ${} N_{k} / N_{k+1} {}$ abelian. Now since ${} G / N_{1} {}$ is abelian, then ${} xy \in yxN_{1} {}$, so ${} xyx^{-1}y^{-1} \in N_{1} {}$, so ${} G^{(1)} \leq N_{1} {}$. Now suppose via induction hypothesis that ${} G^{(k)}\leq N_{k}$ for all ${} k< n {}$. Then since ${} N_{k} / N_{k+1} {}$, then ${} [N_{k},\, N_{k}]\leq N_{k+1} {}$. But that means that ${} G^{(k+1)}=[G^{(k)},\,  G^{(k)}]\leq[N_{k},\, N_{k}]\leq N_{k+1} {}$, so ${} G^{(k+1)}\leq N_{k+1} {}$. Therefore, ${} G^{(r)}\leq N_{r}=1 {}$, so ${} G^{(r)}=1 {}$. Therefore, there exists some $s\leq r$ with ${} G^{(s)}=1 {}$ and ${} G^{(s-1)}\neq 1 {}$. Now ${} G^{(s-1)}\trianglelefteq G {}$, and ${} G^{(s-1)} {}$ is abelian. 

Now let $H \trianglelefteq G$. Then ${} H \cap G^{(s-1)} \trianglelefteq G {}$, and ${} H \cap G^{(s-1)} {}$ is abelian, as required.
12. 
