---
tags:
  - chapter
  - real_anal1
date: 2024-11-18
---
[[Directory]], [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Real Analysis 1/Real Analysis 1|Subject Directory]]
[[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Real Analysis 1/Lectures/1. Introduction|🞀🞀]] [[14. The Fundamental Theorem of Calculus|◀]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Real Analysis 1/Lectures/16. |▶]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Real Analysis 1/Lectures/22. |🞂🞂]]
# Integration
## Improper Integration
### Definition 1.1: Improper Integral (Unbounded)
Let ${} f:\left[ a,\, \infty  \right)\to{}\mathbb{R} {}$ such that ${} f \in  \mathcal{R}[a,\, b] {}$ for all ${} b >a {}$, then we define
$$
\int_{a}^{\infty} f(x) \ud x =\lim_{b\tto \infty} \int_{a}^{b} f(x) \ud x 
$$
If the limit exists.

Let ${} f:\left( -\infty ,\, b \right]\to{}\mathbb{R} {}$ with ${} f \in \mathcal{R}[a,\, b] {}$ for all ${} a<b {}$, then we define
$$
\int_{-\infty }^{b} f(x) \ud x =\lim_{a\tto -\infty} \int_{a}^{b} f(x) \ud x 
$$
If the limit exists.

Let $f:\mathbb{R}\to{}\mathbb{R} {}$ with ${} f \in \mathcal{R}[a,\, b] {}$ for all ${} a <b {}$, then we define
$$
\begin{align}
 \int_{-\infty }^{\infty} f(x) \ud x  & =\lim_{b\tto \infty}  \int_{0}^{b} f(x)  \ud x +\lim_{a\tto -\infty } \int_{a}^{0} f(x) \ud x    \\
 & =\lim_{b\tto \infty}  \int_{c}^{b} f(x)  \ud x +\lim_{a\tto -\infty } \int_{a}^{c} f(x) \ud x   
 \end{align}
$$
if both limits exist, for some ${} c \in \mathbb{R} {}$. 
#### Warning:
It is important to take separate limits! Take ${} f(x)=x {}$. Then
$$
\lim_{b\tto \infty} \int_{-b}^{b} x \ud x 
$$
converges, but the improper integral diverges
#### Example:
Let ${} \alpha \in \mathbb{R} {}$ then
$$
\int_{1}^{\infty} \frac{1}{x^{\alpha}} \ud x 
$$
converges iff $\alpha>1 {}$, as 
$$
\begin{align}
\int_{1}^{b} \frac{1}{x^{\alpha}} \ud x =\frac{ b^{1-\alpha}-1 }{ 1-\alpha }
\end{align}
$$
and so as ${} b \to{} \infty  {}$, this converges iff ${} 1-\alpha <0 {}$. 
#### Example:
Let ${} \beta \in \mathbb{R} {}$, then
$$
\int_{2}^{\infty} \frac{1}{x ( \log x )^{\beta}} \ud x 
$$
converges iff $\beta>1 {}$.
## Unbounded Functions
### Definition 1.2: Improper Integrals (Bounded)
Let ${} [a,\, b] {}$ be a bounded interval. If ${} f \in \mathcal{R}[a+\varepsilon,\, b] {}$ for all ${} \varepsilon >0 {}$ (but possibly ${} f \in \mathcal{R}[a,\, b] {}$), we define
$$
\int_{a}^{b} f(x) \ud x =\lim_{\varepsilon\tto 0^+} \int_{a+{\varepsilon}}^{b} f(x) \ud x  
$$If this limit exists. IN this case we say that ${} \int_{a}^{b} f(x) \ud x  {}$ converges

Similarly, if ${} f \in \mathcal{R}[a,\, b-\varepsilon] {}$ for all $\varepsilon>0 {}$. We define
$$
\int_{a}^{b} f(x) \ud x =\lim_{\varepsilon\tto 0^{+}} \int_{a}^{b-\varepsilon} f(x) \ud x 
$$
if the limit exists.
#### Example:
Let ${} \alpha \in \mathbb{R} {}$, then
$$
\int_{0}^{1}  \frac{1}{x^{\alpha}} \ud x 
$$
converges iff $\alpha<1 {}$, as ${} \int_{\varepsilon}^{1} \frac{1}{x^{\alpha}} \ud x  {}$, and send ${} \varepsilon\to{}0^{+} {}$

Let ${} \beta \in \mathbb{R} {}$, then
$$
\int_{0}^{1/2} \frac{1}{x|\log x|^{\beta}} \ud x 
$$
converges iff $\beta>1 {}$
#### Remark:
Suppose that ${} [a,\, b] {}$ bounded, ${} c \in (a,\, b) {}$. Suppose that ${} f \in \mathcal{R}[a,\, b] {}$, but ${} f \in \mathcal{R}[a,\, c-\varepsilon] {}$ and ${} f \in \mathcal{R}[c+\varepsilon,\, b] {}$, for all $\varepsilon>0 {}$. Then define
$$
\int_{a}^{b} f(x) \ud x =\int_{a}^{c} f(x) \ud x +\int_{c}^{b} f(x) \ud x 
$$
where the integrals are improper as given above
## The p-test
One way to determine if an improper integral converges or diverges is to compare with a simpler improper integral that we know converges or diverges. 
### Theorem 1.3: The Comparison Test
Suppose that ${} 0 \leq f(x)\leq g(x) {}$ for all ${} x \geq a {}$, and ${} \int_{a}^{b} f(x) \ud x  {}$ exists for all $b>a {}$. Now
1. If ${} \int_{a}^{\infty} g(x) \ud x <\infty  {}$, then ${} \int_{a}^{\infty} f(x) \ud x <\infty  {}$
2. if ${} \int_{a}^{\infty} f(x) \ud x  {}$ diverges, then ${} \int_{a}^{\infty} g(x) \ud x  {}$ diverges
#### Strategy:
Aim to compare complicated improper integrals to
$$
\int_{0}^{1} \frac{1}{x^{p}} \ud x 
$$
which converges iff $p<1 {}$, otherwise it converges, or to
$$
\int_{1}^{\infty } \frac{1}{x^{p}} \ud x 
$$
which converges iff $p>1 {}$, otherwise it diverges.
#### Example:
Does the integral ${} \int_{0}^{\infty} \frac{1}{e^{x}-1} \ud x  {}$ converge?

We must consider both as ${} x=0 {}$ and as ${} x\to{}\infty  {}$. 

As ${} x \to{}\infty  {}$, then ${} f(x)=\frac{1}{e^{x}-1}=O(e^{-x}) {}$ so the integral clearly converges at $\infty  {}$. 

As ${} x\to{}0 {}$, we may use Taylor's formula:
$$
\frac{1}{e^{x}-1}=\frac{1}{1+x+\frac{x^{2}}{2}+O(x^{3})-1}=\frac{1}{x+\frac{x^{2}}{2}+O(x^{3})}
$$
so near zero, ${} f(x)$ "looks like" ${} \frac{1}{x} {}$. This gives us reason to believe that the integral diverges, since
$$
\int_{0}^{1} \frac{1}{x} \ud x 
$$
diverges. We still need to prove it! To do so, we inspect the difference:
$$
\begin{align}
 g(x) & =\frac{1}{e^{x}-1}-\frac{1}{x}=\frac{x-(e^{x}-1)}{x(e^{x}-1)}   \\
 & =\frac{-\frac{x^{2}}{2}+O(x^{3})}{x^{2}+O(x^{3})}  \\
 & =-\frac{1}{2}+O(x)
 \end{align} 
$$ as ${} x \to{}0^{+} {}$.

#### Fact: 
If the improper integrals
$$
\int_{0}^{1} f(x) \ud x ,\, \int_{0}^{1} g(x)  \ud x 
$$
converge, then
$$
\int_{0}^{1} f(x)+g(x) \ud x 
$$
also converges

Assume for a contradiction that ${} \int_{0}^{1} \frac{1}{e^{x}-1} \ud x  {}$ converges. Then
$$
\int_{0}^{1} \frac{1}{x} \ud =\int_{0}^{1} \frac{1}{e^{x}-1} \ud x +\int_{0}^{1} g(x) \ud x  
$$
should also converge. However, we know that the left hand side diverges. Therefore, this is a contradiction, and 
$$
\int_{0}^{1} \frac{1}{e^{x}-1} \ud x 
$$
diverges. 

Divergence is usually tricker to show than convergence. 
# Series
### Definition 2.1: Cauchy Sequences
A sequence ${} \{ a_{n} \}_{n=1}^{\infty}  {}$ is said to be Cauchy iff
$$
\forall \varepsilon>0 \exists N \in \mathbb{N} : \forall n,\, m \geq N: |a_{n}-a_{n}|<\varepsilon
$$
### Theorem 2.2: Cauchy's Crietrion
A sequence converges iff it is Cauchy
### Definition 2.3: Infinite Series
A series of real (or complex) numbers ${} \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_{n} {}$ is convergent to the sum $A$ if the sequence of partial sums ${} \sum_{n=0}^{N} a_{n}=A_{N} {}$ converges to $A {}$ 
#### Note:
If ${} \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_{n} {}$ converges, then ${} a_{n}\to{}o {}$ as ${} n\to{}\infty  {}$ (converse is false!)

If ${} \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_{n} {}$ converges, then ${} \sum_{n=N}^{\infty} a_{n}\to{}0 {}$ as ${} N\to{}\infty  {}$.
### Definition 2.4: Absoloute Convergence
A series of real (or complex) numbers ${} \sum_{n=1}^{\infty } a_{n} {}$ is *absolutely convergent*n if the series ${} \sum_{n=1}^{\infty}|a_{n}|  {}$ converges. 

Note that if a series is absolutely convergent, then it is convergent
### Lemma 2.5:
Let ${} |a_{n}|\leq b_{n} {}$ for all ${} n \in \mathbb{Z}^{+} {}$, and assume that the series ${} \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} b_{n}  {}$ converges. Then the series ${} \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_{n} {}$ converges, and, denoting it's sum by $A$, we have the remainder estimate:
$$
\left|  A- \sum_{n=1}^{N} a_{n} \right| \leq  \sum_{n=N+1}^{\infty} b_{n}
$$
for all ${} N \in \mathbb{Z}^{+} {}$.
#### Proof:
First, we show that ${} \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_{n} {}$ converges. Denote ${} A_{N}=\sum_{n=1}^{N} a_{n} {}$ and ${} B_{N}=\sum_{n=1}^{N} b_{n} {}$. Let $K>N$. Then
$$
\begin{align}
 |A_{K}-A_{N}| & =\left|  \sum_{n=1}^{K} a_{n}-\sum_{n=1}^{N} a_{n}  \right|   \\
 & =\left|  \sum_{n=N+1}^{K}a_{n}  \right|  \\
 & \leq  \sum_{n=N+1}^{K} |a_{n}| \\
 & \leq  \sum_{n=N+1}^{K}b_{n} \\
 & =B_{K}-B_{N}  
 \end{align} 
$$
As ${} \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} b_{ n} {}$ converges, then ${} B_{N} {}$ converges, and so ${} B_{N} {}$ is Cauchy. Therefore ${} A_{n}$ is Cauchy, and n converges. Therefore, ${} \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} a_{n} {}$ converges. 

Now we show the remainder estimate. In the inequality above, send ${} K\to{}\infty  {}$. Then
$$
A_{K}-A_{N} \to{}A-A_{N}
$$
on the left hand side, and on the right hand side we get
$$
B_{K}-B_{N}=\sum_{n=N+1}^{K} b_{n}\to{}\sum_{n=N+1}^{\infty} b_{n}
$$
and so
$$
|A-A_{N}|\leq  \sum_{n=N+1}^{\infty} b_{n}
$$
