---
tags:
  - chapter
  - real_anal1
date: 2024-11-22
completed: true
---
[[Directory]], [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Real Analysis 1/Real Analysis 1|Subject Directory]]
[[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Real Analysis 1/Lectures/1. Introduction|🞀🞀]] [[15. Improper Integrals|◀]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Real Analysis 1/Lectures/17. |▶]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Real Analysis 1/Lectures/22. |🞂🞂]]
# Improper Integrals
## Absolute or Conditional Convergence
For now, we focus on integrals of bounded functions over the domain ${} \left[ a,\, \infty  \right) {}$, but a similar discussion holds for all other cases

Note that this is parallel to absolute and conditional converge of series
### Definition 1.1: Absolute and Conditional Convergence
Let ${} a$ be fixed, let ${} f \in  \mathcal{R}[a,\, b] {}$ for all $b>a {}$. We say that the integral ${} \int_{a}^{\infty} f(x) \ud x  {}$ *converges absolutely* if the integral ${} \int_{a}^{\infty} |f(x)| \ud x  {}$ converges as an improper integral.

However, if the integral of $f$ converges, but does not converge absolutely, then we say that is *converges conditionally*. 

If an integral converges absolutely, then it converges (in the regular sense). 
### Theorem 1.2: Absolute Convergence Implies Convergence
Let ${} a \in \mathbb{R} {}$, and let ${} f,\, g {}$ be functions on ${} [a,\, \infty ) {}$. Assume that ${} f,\, g \in \mathcal{R}[a,\, b] {}$ for all $b>a {}$, and ${} |f(x)|\leq g(x) {}$ for all $x\geq a$. If the integral ${} \int_{a}^{\infty} g(x) \ud x  {}$ convergence, then the integral ${} \int_{a}^{\infty} f(x) \ud x  {}$ converges too. 

Before proof, we translate Cauchy's Criterion to functions:
### Lemma 1.3: 
Let ${} a \in \mathbb{R} {}$, and let $f$ be a function on ${} \left[ a,\, \infty \right) {}$. Then the limit ${} \displaystyle\lim_{x\tto \infty} f(x) {}$ exists iff for any sequence of points ${} \{ x_{n} \}_{n=1}^{\infty}  {}$ such that ${} x_{n}\to{}\infty  {}$, as ${} n\to{}\infty  {}$, then the limit ${} \displaystyle\lim_{n\tto \infty} f(x_{n}) {}$.
#### Proof:
Exercise: fill in the gaps #todo 
${} (\Rightarrow ) {}$: for me to do
${} (\Leftarrow ) {}$: Assume that for any ${} x_{n}\to{}\infty  {}$, the limit ${} \displaystyle\lim_{n\tto \infty} f(x_{n}) {}$ exists. We need to show that ${} \displaystyle\lim_{x\tto \infty} f(x) {}$ exists. 

First we check that the value of ${} \displaystyle\lim_{n\tto \infty} f(x_{n}) {}$ is independent of the choice of sequence ${} x_{n}\to{}\infty. {}$ The proof is in the lecture notes.

Now we check that ${} \displaystyle\lim_{x\tto \infty} f(x) {}$ exists. Let ${} \lim_{n\tto \infty} f(x_{n})=A {}$. For a contradiction, suppose that ${} \lim_{x\tto \infty} f(x)\neq A {}$. Then 
$$
\exists \varepsilon>0 : \forall R>0 :\exists x_{R}>R :|f(x_{R})-A|\geq \varepsilon
$$
Choose ${} R=1,\, 2,\, 3,\,\dots {}$. Then for each $R$, since $x_{R}>R$, then ${} \{ x_{R} \}_{R=1}^{\infty}  {}$ diverges. However, by definition, ${} \lim_{R\tto \infty}f(x_{R})\neq A {}$. This is a contradiction, as ${} x_{R}\to{}\infty  {}$. Therefore, ${} \lim_{x\tto \infty} f(x)=A {}$.

#### Proof of 1.2:
Let ${} F(b)=\int_{a}^{b} f(x) \ud x  {}$, and let ${} G(b)=\int_{a}^{b} g(x) \ud x  {}$. Convergence of ${} \int_{a}^{\infty} g(x) \ud x  {}$ means
$$
\lim_{b\tto \infty} G(b)
$$
exists. By the lemma, for any sequence ${} b_{n}\to{}\infty  {}$, ${} \lim_{n\tto \infty} G(b_{n}) {}$ exists. Take ${} b_{n}<b_{m} {}$. Then
$$
\begin{align}
 |F(b_{m})-F(b_{n})| &  = \left| \int_{b_{n}}^{b_{m}} f(x) \ud x  \right|    \\
 & \leq \int_{b_{n}}^{b_{m}} |f(x)| \ud x  \\
 & \leq  \int_{b_{n}}^{b_{m}} g(x) \ud x  \\
 & =G(b_{m})-G(b_{n})
 \end{align}
$$
We know that ${} \{ G(b_{n}) \} {}$ converges. Therefore, ${} \{ G(b_{n}) \} {}$ is Cauchy. By the bound above, this implies that ${} \{ F(b_{n}) \} {}$ is Cauchy. Therefore, ${} \{ F(b_{n}) \} {}$ converges, and ${} \int_{a}^{\infty} f(x) \ud x  {}$ converges by the lemma again.
#### Example:
For $\alpha>0 {}$, lets determine whether 
$$
\int_{1}^{\infty} \frac{ \sin x }{ x^{\alpha} } \ud x 
$$
converges absolutely or conditionally. 

We know that ${} |\sin (x)|\leq 1 {}$. Therefore, we get absolute converge for $\alpha>1 {}$, as
$$
\int_{1}^{\infty} \left| \frac{ \sin x }{ x^{\alpha} } \right|  \ud x \leq  \int_{1}^{\infty} \frac{1}{x^{\alpha}} \ud x 
$$
which converges for $\alpha>1 {}$.

Now if ${} 0<\alpha\leq 1 {}$, we proceed by integration by parts:
$$
\int_{1}^{b} \frac{\sin x}{x^{\alpha}}  \ud x=  - \frac{\cos b}{b^{\alpha}} +\cos 1-\alpha \int_{1}^{b} \frac{\cos x}{x^{1+\alpha}}  \ud x 
$$
The first term tends to $0$ as ${} b\to{}\infty  {}$, the 2nd term is a constant, and by the same logic as above, then the third term converges. Therefore, this converges.

However, it does *not* converge absolutely. Since ${} |\sin x|>(\sin x)^{2} {}$
$$
\begin{align}
 \int_{1}^{b} \left| \frac{ \sin x }{ x^{\alpha} } \right|  \ud x  & \geq  \int_{1}^{b} \frac{ \sin ^{2}x }{ x^{\alpha} } \ud x    \\
 & = \frac{1}{2} \int_{1}^{b} \frac{ 1-\cos (2x) }{ x^{\alpha} } \ud x 
 \end{align}
$$
The first half of the integral diverges, by the p-test, and the 2nd half converges, clearly. Therefore, by the comparison test, the original integral diverges. 
### Theorem 8.3:
Let $f$ and $g$ be continuous functions on ${} \left[ a,\, \infty  \right) {}$ such that the integral
$$
\int_{a}^{x} f(x) \ud x 
$$
is bounded, and ${} g(x)$ is continuously differentiable, ${} g\to{}0 {}$ as ${} x\to{}\infty  {}$, and is monotone. Then 
$$
\int_{a}^{\infty} f(x)g(x) \ud x 
$$
converges.
#### Proof:
Exercise 8
###  Theorem 1.4:
Let ${} f(x)\geq 0$ be a bonunded non-increasing function on ${} \left[ 0,\, \infty  \right) {}$. Then the series
$$
\sum_{n=1}^{\infty} f(n)
$$
converges iff the integral
$$
\int_{0}^{\infty} f(x) \ud x 
$$
converges. Furthermore, we have
$$
\int_{0}^{\infty} f(x) \ud x \leq \sum_{n=1}^{\infty} f(n) \leq  \int_{1}^{\infty } f(x) \ud x 
$$
