---
tags:
  - chapter
  - advalg1
date: 2024-11-14
---
[[Directory]], [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Advanced Algebra 1/Advanced Algebra 1|Subject Directory]]
[[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Advanced Algebra 1/Lectures/1. |🞀🞀]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Advanced Algebra 1/Lectures/12. |◀]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Advanced Algebra 1/Lectures/14. |▶]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Advanced Algebra 1/Lectures/22. |🞂🞂]]
# Homology
## Exact Sequences and Chain Complexes
### Definition 1.1: Exact Sequences
A sequence of $R$-modules
$$
M \to{f}N \to{g}P
$$
where $f$ and $g$ are $R {}$-module homomorphisms is called *exact* (at ${} N {}$) if ${} \im f=\ker g {}$.
#### Example:
$$
\begin{align}
   \mathbb{Z} /6\mathbb{Z}  & \to{} \mathbb{Z} / 4\mathbb{Z} \to{} \mathbb{Z} /2\mathbb{Z}   \\
a  & \mapsto [2a] \\
 & \qquad \quad  b \mapsto  [b]
 \end{align}
$$
now ${} \ker g=2 \mathbb{Z} /4\mathbb{Z}=\im f {}$
### Definition 1.2: Slightly Longer Exact Sequences
A sequence
$$
M_{n} \to{f_{n}} M_{n-1} \to{f_{n-1}}\dots \to{f_{2}} M_{1} \to{f_{1}} M_{0}
$$
of $R$-modules and $R$-module homomorphisms is called *exact* if ${} \im f_{i+1}=\ker f_{i} {}$ for all ${} 1 \leq  i \leq n-1 {}$
#### Example:
$$
0 \to{f_{4}} \mathbb{Z} \underset{\times m}{\to{f_{3}}} \mathbb{Z}\underset{\pi}{\to{f_{2}}} \mathbb{Z} /m\mathbb{Z} \to{f_{1}}0
$$
is exact
#### Example: Short Exact Sequences
Any exact sequence of the form
$$
0 \to{}M \to{f}N \to{g}P \to{}0
$$
is called a short exact sequence. Note that the condition for the sequence to be exact is that $f$ is injective, $g$ is surjective, and ${} \ker g=\im f {}$. 
#### Example:
If we have
$$
0 \to{}M \to{f}N\to{}0
$$
then $f$ must be both injective and surjective, so $f$ is an isomorphism. 

The notion of exact sequences generalises to a sequence indexed by $\mathbb{Z}$.
$$
\dots \to{}M_{n} \to{f}M_{n-1}\to{}\dots 
$$
This is called a *long* exact sequence. 
#### Example:
$$
\dots \to{} \mathbb{R}^{2} \to{\begin{pmatrix}0 & 1 \\ 0 & 0 \end{pmatrix} }\mathbb{R}^{2}\to{\begin{pmatrix}0 & 1 \\ 0 & 0 \end{pmatrix} }\mathbb{R}^{2} \to{\begin{pmatrix}0 & 1 \\ 0 & 0 \end{pmatrix} } \mathbb{R}^{2}\to{}\dots 
$$
Exactness at ${} M_{i}$:
$$
\ker f_{i}=\left\langle  \begin{pmatrix} 1 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix}   \right\rangle 
$$
and
$$
\im f_{i+1}=\left\langle  \begin{pmatrix} 1 \\ 0 \end{pmatrix}   \right\rangle 
$$
#### Example:
$$
\dots \to{} \mathbb{Z} \to{\id } \mathbb{Z} \to{0} \mathbb{Z} \to{\id } \mathbb{Z} \to{0} \mathbb{Z} \to{}\dots 
$$
is exact. 
## Chain Complexes
### Note:
In an exact sequence composing consecutive maps is $0 {}$, as, given an exact sequence
$$
\dots \to{}M_{i+1} \to{f_{i+1}} M_{i} \to{f_{i}} M_{i-1}\to{}\dots 
$$
If ${} m \in M_{i+1} {}$, the ${} f_{i+1}(m) \in \im f_{i+1}=\ker f_{i} {}$, so ${} f_{i}(f_{i+1}(m))=0 {}$, and so for any $i$, ${} f_{i} \circ f_{i+1}=0 {}$. 
### Definition 1.3: Chain Complexes
A sequence of ${} R$-modules and homomorphisms 
$$
\dots \to{}M_{i+1} \to{f_{i+1}} M_{i} \to{f_{i}} M_{i-1}\to{}\dots 
$$
is called a chain complex if ${} f_{i} \circ  f_{i+1}=0 {}$, that is, ${} \im f_{i+1} \subseteq \ker f_{i} {}$.
#### Example:
Every long exact sequence is a chain complex. 
#### Example:
$$
\dots \to{}0 \to{}0 \to{}0 \to{}M_{0} \to{}0 \to{}0 \to{}0\to{}\dots 
$$
(often we say that the degree $i$th term is the term indexed by $i$.) Then $M_{0}$ can be non-zero. 
#### Example:
$$
\dots \to{}\mathbb{Z} / 8\mathbb{Z} \to{\times 4}\mathbb{Z} / 8\mathbb{Z}\to{\times 4}\mathbb{Z} / 8\mathbb{Z} \to{}\dots 
$$
then we have that ${} f_{i} \circ  f_{i+1}=(\times 4)\circ (\times 4)=\times 16=0 {}$. 
#### Example:
We often denote 
$$
\dots \to{}M_{i+1} \to{f_{i+1}} M_{i} \to{f_{i}} M_{i-1}\to{}\dots 
$$
by
$$
(M_{})
$$