---
tags:
  - chapter
  - advalg1
date: 2024-10-03
---
[[Directory]], [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Advanced Algebra 1/Advanced Algebra 1|Subject Directory]]
[[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Advanced Algebra 1/Lectures/1. |🞀🞀]] [[2. Properties of Quotients and Homomorphisms|◀]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Advanced Algebra 1/Lectures/4. |▶]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Advanced Algebra 1/Lectures/22. |🞂🞂]]
### Example:
Consider 
$$
\mathbb{R} ^{\times } / \{ \pm1 \}
$$
We want a homomorphism ${} \mathbb{R} ^{\times } / \{  \pm 1 \}\to{}\mathbb{R}_{>0} {}$. Note that we already have a map ${} \mathbb{R}^{\times }\to{f}\mathbb{R}_{> 0} {}$ mapping ${} x\mapsto x^{2} {}$. Now by the first isomorphism theorem, we have 
$$
\mathbb{R}^{\times }\to{}\mathbb{R}^{\times } / \{ \pm 1 \} \to{} \mathbb{R_{>0}}
$$
since ${} \ker f=\{ \pm 1 \} {}$
Note, in this, we don't need ${} G /N {}$ to have ${} N = \ker f {}$, we only need ${} N \leq  \ker f {}$ (factor theorem).
# Group Actions
### Definition 1.1: Group Actions
Let $G {}$ be a group and $X {}$ be a set. Then an (left) *action* of ${} G {}$ on $X {}$, is a map of sets 
$$
\begin{align}
 \cdot :G \times  X &  \to{}X   \\
(g,\, x)  & \mapsto g \cdot x
 \end{align}
$$
such that 
1. ${} 1 \cdot x=x {}$
2. ${} g\cdot (h\cdot x)=(gh)\cdot x {}$
#### Example:
Let ${} G=S_{n} {}$, with ${} X=\{ 1,\,\dots,\,n \} {}$. Given ${} \sigma \in S_{n}=\{ \alpha \in X^{X} \mid  \alpha \text{ is a bijection} \} {}$, we set
$$
\sigma \cdot x=\sigma(x)
$$
We check that this is a group action. First, note that ${} 1 \in S_{n} {}$ is the identity, and so
$$
1 \cdot x=\id(x)=x
$$
Next, if ${} \sigma,\, \tau \in S_{n} {}$, then
$$
\begin{align}
\sigma\cdot (\tau\cdot x) & =\sigma\cdot (\tau(x)) \\
 & =\sigma(\tau (x))  \\
 & =(\sigma \circ \tau)(x) \\
 & =(\sigma\tau) \cdot x
\end{align}
$$
Therefore, ${} \cdot {}$ is a group action.
#### Example:
Any group $G$ acts on itself by left-multiplication. In particular, define
$$
g\cdot x=gx
$$
This is clearly an action. Right multiplication is *not* an action unless $G {}$ is abelian.

We also have an action 
$$
g \cdot x=gxg^{-1}
$$
This is $G$ acting on itself by *conjugation*.
### Definition 1.2: Orbits
Let ${} \cdot :G \times  X\to{}X {}$ be an action, then the *orbit* of $x$ under the action of $G$ on $X$, is defined to be the set
$$
\{ g \cdot x \mid  g \in G \}=G \cdot x
$$
### Notation:
An action of $G$ on $X$ is often denoted by $G {}$ (arrow going back round on itself look this up later  #todo)
### Lemma 1.3: 
Suppose that $G$ acts on $X$. Then the set of all orbits defines a partition of $X$ into disjoint subsets. 
#### Proof:
The orbits cover $X {}$, as ${} x \in G \cdot x {}$, and so for all $x$ there exists some orbit which contains it. 

Now suppose that ${} x \in G \cdot y {}$. for some ${} y \in X {}$, that is ${} x=h\cdot y {}$ for some ${} h \in G {}$. Then 
$$
\begin{align}
 G \cdot x & =\{  g\cdot x \mid  g \in G \}   \\
 & =\{  g\cdot (h\cdot y) \mid  g \in G \} \\
 & =\{ (gh)\cdot y \mid g \in G \} \\
 & \subseteq \{  g \cdot y \mid  g \in G \}=G\cdot y
 \end{align}
$$
So ${} G \cdot x \subseteq G \cdot y {}$. Since ${} y=h^{-1} \cdot x {}$, then the reverse is true and ${} G \cdot x = G\cdot y {}$