---
tags:
  - chapter
  - advalg1
date: 2024-10-11
---
[[Directory]], [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Advanced Algebra 1/Advanced Algebra 1|Subject Directory]]
[[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Advanced Algebra 1/Lectures/1. |🞀🞀]] [[5. Free Groups and Universal Properties|◀]] [[7. Rings, PIDs, and Modules|▶]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Advanced Algebra 1/Lectures/22. |🞂🞂]]
# Commutative Algebra
## Ring Theory Review
### Definition 1.1: Rings
A ring is a set $R$ with $2$ binary operations $+$, called addition, and $\cdot$, called multiplication. The $\cdot$ is often omitted. Then the following are true:
1. ${} (R,\, +)$ is an abelian group
2. $\cdot$ is associative, and it has an identity element $1_{R}$ (that is, ${} 1_{R}\cdot r=r=r\cdot 1_{R} {}$)
3. $\cdot$ is distributive over addition, that is, for all ${} r,\, s,\, t \in R {}$
$$
\begin{align}
 r \cdot (s+t) & =r\cdot s+r\cdot t   \\
(s+t)\cdot r & =s\cdot r+t\cdot r
 \end{align}
$$
#### Example:
Clearly, $\mathbb{Z}$ is a ring, as is ${} \mathbb{R},\, \mathbb{Q},\, \mathbb{C} {}$, etc. Also, ${} \mathbb{Z} /n \mathbb{Z} {}$ is a ring. 

We have that ${} \{ 0 \} {}$ is a ring, as ${} 0\cdot 0=0 {}$ and ${} 0+0=0 {}$, and ${} 0_{R}=1_{R}=0 {}$. 
#### Exercise: #todo 
Conversely if ${} R$ is a ring such that ${} 0_{R}=1_{R} {}$, then ${} R=0 {}$. 

Clearly, a commutative ring is a ring where $\cdot$ is commutative. 

#### Example:
${} M_{n}(\mathbb{R}) {}$ is an example of a non-commutative ring under matrix addition and matrix multiplication. 

${} \mathbb{R}[x]$ is the polynomial ring. 
#### Notation:
For any ring $R {}$, given ${} n \in \mathbb{Z} {}$, we obtain an element $n_{R}$ given by 
$$
n_{R}=\underbrace{ 1_{R}+1_{R}+\dots+1_{R} }_{ n \text{ times} }
$$
if $n>0 {}$, and
$$
n_{R}=\underbrace{ -1_{R}-1_{R}-\dots-1_{R} }_{ n \text{ times} }
$$
if $n<0 {}$, and if ${} n=0 {}$, then ${} n_{R}=0 {}$
### Definition 1.2: Units
An element ${} r \in R {}$ is called a unit if there exists a multiplicative inverse, that is, there exists some ${} s \in R {}$ such that ${} sr=rs=1_{R} {}$. We denote the set of all units of $R$ to be ${} R^{\times } {}$. 

It is easy to see that the product of two units is a unit, and the identity is a unit. Then, 
$$
(R^{\times }, \cdot )
$$
is a group. 
#### Examples:
${} \mathbb{R}^{\times }=\mathbb{R} \setminus \{ 0 \} {}$, and ${} \mathbb{Z}^{\times }=\{ \pm 1 \} {}$

We claim that ${} (\mathbb{R}[0])^{\times }=\mathbb{R}^{\times } {}$. This works since ${} \deg (gf)=\deg (g)\deg (f) {}$. Therefore, if $f$ is invertible, then ${} \deg f=0 {}$, and ${} f=r {}$ for some constant. 

# FROM NOW ON ASSUME THAT ALL RINGS ARE COMMUTATIVE

### Definition 1.3: Zero-divisors
Let ${} r \in R {}$. If there exists some ${} s \in R \setminus \{ 0 \} {}$ such that ${} rs=0 {}$, we say that $r$ is a *zero-divisor*
#### Example:
In ${} \mathbb{Z} / n \mathbb{Z} {}$, we have that ${} \conj{2}\cdot  \conj{2}=\conj{2\cdot 2}=\conj{4}=\conj{0} {}$, and ${} \conj{0} {}$ is a zero-divisor

### Definition 1.4: Integral Domains
We say that ${} R\neq 0 {}$ is an integral domain when ${} R$ has no non-trivial (i.e. non-zero) zero-divisors
#### Exercise: #todo 
Show that ${} \mathbb{Z} / n\mathbb{Z} {}$ is an integral domain iff $n$ is prime
### Definitions 1.5: Fields
We say that $R$ is a field iff every non-zero element is a unit, that is
$$
R^{\times } =R \setminus \{ 0 \}
$$
#### Examples:
${} \mathbb{Q},\, \mathbb{R},\, \mathbb{C} {}$ are all fields
### Definition 1.5: Subrings
We say that ${} S \subseteq R {}$ is a subring when
1. ${} 1_{R} \in S {}$
2. ${} (S,\, +) {}$ is a subgroup of ${} (R,\, +) {}$
3. ${} S$ is closed under multiplication
Note that these are the exact conditions that $H$ is a ring under $+,\, \cdot  {}$.
#### Examples:
The following are subrings:
$$
\mathbb{Z} \subseteq \mathbb{Q} \subseteq \mathbb{R} \subseteq \mathbb{R}[x]
$$
#### Notation:
Polynomial rings exist for any $R$, that is, ${} R[x]$. Then since this is a ring, we may have ${} (R[x])[y] {}$, and we write
$$
R[x,\, y]=(R[x])[y]
$$
(as soon as we get isomorphism, we can show that ${} R[x,\, y]\cong R[y,\,x] {}$ )
#### Note:
${} \{ 0 \} \subseteq \mathbb{Z} {}$, but this is *not* a subring, as it does not have the same structure as $\mathbb{Z}$. 
### Definition 1.6: Ring Homomorphism
Suppose that $R,\, S {}$ are rings. We say that a map of sets $f:R\to{}S {}$ is a *ring homomorphism* when
1. ${} f(1_{R})=1_{S} {}$
2. ${} f(a+b)=f(a)+f(b) {}$
3. ${} f(ab)=f(a)f(b) {}$

Note that since $f$ may be considered a group homomorphism under $+$, then ${} f(0_{R})=0_{S} {}$
### Definition 1.7: Ring Isomorphism
We say that $f$ is an isomorphism if it is bijective.
#### Exercise: #todo 
Show that if $f$ is a ring isomorphism, then it's inverse is a ring isomorphism.

This makes commutative rings into a category, which we write as ${} \mathbf{CRing} {}$. In particular, 
$$
\begin{align}
 \Ob(\mathbf{CRing}) & =\text{ rings}   \\
\text{morphisms} & =\text{ring homomorphisms} \\
\text{composition} & =\text{ composition as maps of sets}
 \end{align}
$$
#### Examples:
${} \mathbb{Z} \to{}R {}$ mapping $1\mapsto 1_{R}$ and $n\mapsto n_{R}$
$\mathbb{C}\to{}\mathbb{C} {}$ mapping ${} z \mapsto \conj{z} {}$
### Definition 1.8: Ker and Im
The image of any ring homomorphism is a subring, 
$$
\im f=\{ f(r) \mid  r \in R \}
$$
We define the kernel to be ${} \ker f=\{ r \in R \mid  f(r)=0 \} {}$. This is an abelian group under addition, but in general is almost never a subring.
### Definition 1.9: Ideal
We say that ${} I \subseteq R {}$ is an *ideal*, if the following hold:
1. $I$ is a subgroup of ${} (R,\, +)$
2. ${} ra \in I {}$ for all ${} r \in R,\, a \in I {}$. 
We write ${} I \trianglelefteq R {}$. 