---
tags:
  - chapter
  - advalg1
date: 2024-10-17
---
[[Directory]], [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Advanced Algebra 1/Advanced Algebra 1|Subject Directory]]
[[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Advanced Algebra 1/Lectures/1. |🞀🞀]] [[6. Introduction to Rings|◀]] [[8. Modules and Direct Products|▶]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Advanced Algebra 1/Lectures/22. |🞂🞂]]
# 
## 
#todo watch first 15 mins
### Definition 1.2:
If ${} a \in R {}$, the subset ${} \{ ra \mid r \in R \} \subseteq R {}$ is an ideal. This is called the *principle ideal* generated by $a {}$. We denote this $Ra {}$, or ${} (a)$. 
#### Example
Suppose that $R {}$ has exactly two ideals (these must be ${} R$ and $0 {}$). So all principal ideals are either ${} 0$ or $R {}$. Therefore, for all non-zero elements $r {}$ of ${} R$,
$$
(r)=R
$$
and $R$ is a unit. In particular, $R$ is a field. 
### Definition 1.3:
If ${} a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{n} \in R {}$, the ideal generated by this set is
$$
(a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{ n})=\left\{  \sum_{i=1}^{n}  r_{i}a_{i} \mid  r_{i }\in R \right\}
$$
This is the smallest ideal of $R$ containing ${} a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{ n} {}$.
(this definition may be extended to any subset of $R$, the definition is in the notes but it is unneeded for this course)
#### Example:
We consider the ideal
$$
(10,\, 15)\trianglelefteq \mathbb{Z}
$$
It is clear that 
$$
(10,\, 15) \subseteq  (5) \trianglelefteq \mathbb{Z}
$$
We claim that these are equal. We have that
$$
-1\cdot 10+1\cdot 15=5
$$
and so ${} 5 \in (10,\, 15) {}$, therefore, it is clear that ${} (5) \subseteq (10,\, 15) {}$, and ${} (5)=(10,\, 15) {}$. 
#### Example:
Now consider ${} \mathbb{R}[X,\, Y] {}$. Let 
$$
I=(X,\, Y) \trianglelefteq \mathbb{R}[X,\, Y]
$$
We claim that this isn't principle. Suppose that ${} (f)=(X,\, Y) {}$ for some ${} f \in \mathbb{R}[X,\, Y] {}$. This means that
$$
\begin{align}
 X & =rf  \\
Y & =sf
 \end{align}

$$
for some ${} r,\, s \in \mathbb{R}[X,\, Y] {}$. Therefore, ${} r=a_{1}X {}$ or ${} r=a_{0} {}$, and ${} s=b_{1}Y {}$ or ${} s=b_{0} {}$, with ${} a_{ i},\, b_{ i} \in \mathbb{R} {}$. Therefore, $f$ is constant. Then, either ${} f=0 {}$, which is a contradiction, or ${} f=\lambda \in \mathbb{R}^{\times } {}$, and then ${} (f)=\mathbb{R}[X,\, Y]\neq (X,\, Y) {}$, which is again a contradiction. 
### Definition 1.4: Principle Ideal Domains
We say that $R$ is a *principle ideal domain* (PID) if $R$ is a domain and every ideal is principle, that is, if $I \trianglelefteq R {}$, then 
$$
I=(r)
$$
for some ${} r \in R {}$. 
#### Examples:
$\mathbb{Z}$ is a PID, as is $\mathbb{R}[X]$, as for any ideal $I$, we show that ${} I=(f) {}$, where $f$ has minimal degree amongst elements of $I$. 

Let $I \trianglelefteq R {}$. Since this is a subgroup under addition, we know that
$$
R / I
$$
is a group under addition. We claim that this has a natural multiplication inherited from $R$. In particular, we set
$$
\conj{r} \cdot \conj{s}=\conj{rs}
$$
and we claim that this makes ${} R /I {}$ a ring. To see that this is a well defined binary operation. Suppose that ${} \conj{r'}=\conj{r} {}$, and ${} \conj{s'}=\conj{r} {}$. Then
$$
r+I=r'+I\Rightarrow r-r' \in I,\, s-s' \in I
$$
Then 
$$
rs-r's'=r(s-s')+s'(r-r') \in I
$$
and 
$$
\conj{rs}=\conj{r's'}
$$
Now it is clear to see that ${} R /I {}$ is a ring, as all the required properties are inherited from the multiplication on $R {}$. 

The canonical group projection ${} \pi:R\to{}R /I {}$ mapping ${} r\mapsto \conj{r} {}$ is also a ring homomorphism.

Now suppose that ${} f:R \to{}S {}$ is a ring homomorphism. We know that ${} I=\ker f {}$ is an ideal. Now by the first isomorphism theorem for groups, there exists a unique isomorphism (of groups) ${} \theta:R /\ker f \to{}\im f {}$ mapping ${} \conj{r} \mapsto f(r) {}$. Now since ${} \pi(\conj{1_{R}})=f(1_{r})=1_{S} {}$, and similarly, 
$$
\pi(\conj{rs})=f(rs)=f(r)f(s)=\pi(\conj{r})\pi(\conj{s})
$$
#### Example:
$$
\mathbb{R}[X] / X^{2}+1
$$
Consider the homomorphism given by 
$$
\begin{align}
\varphi :\mathbb{R}[x] & \to{}\mathbb{C} \\
f  & \mapsto f(i)
\end{align}
$$
which is evaluation at $i {}$. Clearly, $\im \varphi=\mathbb{C} {}$, as the polynomial ${} aX+b=ai+b {}$. It is clear that 
$$
(X^{2}+1) \subseteq \ker \varphi \subseteq \mathbb{R}[x]
$$
So, by the first isomorphism theorem for rings, there exists a unique isomorphism
$$
\theta:\frac{\mathbb{R}[X]}{X^{2}+1}\to{}\mathbb{C}
$$
mapping
$$
\conj{f} \mapsto f(i)
$$
#### Exercise:
For any ring homomorphism $f:R\to{}S {}$, and ideal $J \trianglelefteq S {}$, show that $f^{-1}(J) {}$ is an ideal of $R$. 
#### Exercise:
If $I \trianglelefteq R {}$, there exists a bijection
$$
\{ J \trianglelefteq R \mid  I \subseteq J \} \longleftrightarrow \{ \conj{J} \subseteq R /I \mid  \conj{J} \trianglelefteq R/I \}
$$
### Definition 1.5: Prime ideals
We say that an ideal ${} I \trianglelefteq R {}$ is *prime* when
1) $I \neq R$
2) ${} rs \in I\Rightarrow r \in I\text{ or }s \in I {}$. 
#### Note:
The first condition is equivalent to ${} R /I {}$ not being the zero ring
The second condition is equivalent to the condition that ${} \conj{r} \cdot \conj{s}\neq \conj{0} {}$ if ${} \conj{r},\, \conj{s} \neq \conj{0} {}$, that is, iff ${} R /I {}$ is a domain
### Definition 1.6: Maximal Ideals
An ideal $I \trianglelefteq R {}$ is called *maximal*
1) ${} I \neq R {}$
2) If ${} J$ is an ideal of $R {}$ containing $I$, then either $J=I {}$ or $J=R {}$. 
#### Note:
Again the first condition is equivalent to ${} R /I {}$ not being the zero ring
Since ideals of $R/I$ are in bijection with ideals of $R$ containing $I$, the second condition holds iff ${} R /I {}$ has exactly two ideals, that is, ${} R /I {}$ is a field. Then it is clear that all maximal ideals are prime. 
#### Example:
For $R=\mathbb{Z} {}$, ${} (n) {}$ is prime iff $n {}$ is a (positive or negative) prime, or ${} n=0 {}$, and maximal iff $n$ is a (positive or negative) prime. 
# Modules
(from now on all rings are commutative)
### Definition 2.1: Modules
An $R$-module is an abelian group ${} (M,\, +) {}$ together with 
$$
\begin{align}
 \cdot :R \times M  & \to{}M   \\
(r,\, m) & \mapsto r\cdot m
 \end{align}
$$
such that
1) ${} 1_{R}\cdot m=m {}$
2) ${} r\cdot (m+n)=r\cdot m+r\cdot n {}$
3) ${} (r+s)\cdot m=r\cdot m+s\cdot m {}$
4) ${} r\cdot (s\cdot m)=(rs)\cdot m {}$

#### Example:
$R=\mathbb{Z} {}$, then let ${} (M,\, +)$ be any abelian group. Then $M {}$ has a canonical $\mathbb{Z} {}$-module structure given by
$$
r\cdot m = \underbrace{ m+m+\dots+m }_{ r\text{ times} }
$$
#### Example:
Let ${} R=K {}$ is a field, then an $R$-module is a $K$-vector space. 
#### Example:
For any ring $R$, we can view $R$ as an $R$-module by setting ${} r\cdot m=rm {}$ for all ${} r,\, m \in R {}$. 
#### Example:
If $f:R\to{}S {}$ is a ring homomorphism, then $S$ may be considered as an $R$-module by ${} r\cdot s=f(r)s {}$
#### Example:
${} R^{n}$ is an $R$-module by setting ${} r\cdot (m_{1},\,\dots,\,m_{n})=(rm_{1},\,\dots,\,rm_{n}) {}$. 
#### Definition 2.2:
Let $M$ be an $R$-module, and let ${} N \subseteq M {}$ be a subset. Then we say that $N$ is an $R$-submodule of $M$ iff 
1) ${} (N,\, +)$ is a subgroup under addition
2) ${} r\cdot n \in N {}$ for all ${} r \in R,\, n \in N {}$. 
Then clearly $N$ is an $R$-module in it's own right. 
#### Example:
If we consider $R {}$ as a module over itself, then ${} N \subseteq R {}$ is a $R$-submodule iff $N$ is an ideal if $R$. 
#### Example:
For any $R$-module $N$ and ${} m \in N {}$, the subset ${} R \cdot m=\{ r\cdot m \mid  r \in R \} {}$ is a submodule of $N$. This is called the cyclic submodule of $M$ generated by $m$. 
#### Example:
If ${} M_{1},\, M_{2} \subseteq N {}$ are submodules (over a fixed ring $R {}$), then so are
$$
\begin{align}
   M_{1}  & \cap  M_{2}  \\
   M_{1} & +M_{2}=\{ m_{1}+m_{2} \mid  m_{1} \in M_{1},\, m_{2} \in M_{2} \}
 \end{align}
$$
Now
$$
(a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{n})=(a_{1})+\dots+(a_{n})
$$
in the case of ideals. 

Now given ${} m_{1},\,\dots,\, m_{n} \in N {}$, we set
$$
\langle m_{1},\,\dots,\,m_{ n} \rangle =R\cdot m_{1}+\dots+R\cdot m_{n}
$$
and this is the smallest submodule that contains ${} m_{1},\,\dots,\,m_{ n} {}$. 
### Definition 2.3: Quotient Modules
If $M$ is an $R$-module, and $N {}$ is any $R$-submodule, then 
$$
M /N
$$
exists as an abelian group, and has a canonical $R$-module structure defined by setting 
$$
r\cdot (m+N)=(r\cdot m)+N
$$
This is well defined, as suppose that ${} \conj{m}=\conj{m'} {}$, then ${} m-m' \in N {}$, and now
$$
r\cdot m-r\cdot m'=r(m-m') \in N
$$
and ${} rm+N=rm'+N {}$.

