---
tags:
  - chapter
  - advalg1
date: 2024-10-17
---
[[Directory]], [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Advanced Algebra 1/Advanced Algebra 1|Subject Directory]]
[[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Advanced Algebra 1/Lectures/1. |🞀🞀]] [[6. Introduction to Rings|◀]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Advanced Algebra 1/Lectures/8. |▶]] [[University/Undergraduate/Second Year/Advanced Algebra 1/Lectures/22. |🞂🞂]]
# 
## 
#todo watch first 15 mins
### Definition 1.2:
If ${} a \in R {}$, the subset ${} \{ ra \mid r \in R \} \subseteq R {}$ is an ideal. This is called the *principle ideal* generated by $a {}$. We denote this $Ra {}$, or ${} (a)$. 
#### Example
Suppose that $R {}$ has exactly two ideals (these must be ${} R$ and $0 {}$). So all principal ideals are either ${} 0$ or $R {}$. Therefore, for all non-zero elements $r {}$ of ${} R$,
$$
(r)=R
$$
and $R$ is a unit. In particular, $R$ is a field. 
### Definition 1.3:
If ${} a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{n} \in R {}$, the ideal generated by this set is
$$
(a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{ n})=\left\{  \sum_{i=1}^{n}  r_{i}a_{i} \mid  r_{i }\in R \right\}
$$
This is the smallest ideal of $R$ containing ${} a_{1},\,\dots,\,a_{ n} {}$.
(this definition may be extended to any subset of $R$, the definition is in the notes but it is unneeded for this course)
#### Example:
We consider the ideal
$$
(10,\, 15)\trianglelefteq \mathbb{Z}
$$
It is clear that 
$$
(10,\, 15) \subseteq  (5) \trianglelefteq \mathbb{Z}
$$
We claim that these are equal. We have that
$$
-1\cdot 10+1\cdot 15=5
$$
and so ${} 5 \in (10,\, 15) {}$, therefore, it is clear that ${} (5) \subseteq (10,\, 15) {}$, and ${} (5)=(10,\, 15) {}$. 
#### Example:
Now consider ${} \mathbb{R}[X,\, Y] {}$. Let 
$$
I=(X,\, Y) \trianglelefteq \mathbb{R}[X,\, Y]
$$
We claim that this isn't principle. Suppose that ${} (f)=(X,\, Y) {}$ for some ${} f \in \mathbb{R}[X,\, Y] {}$. This means that
$$
\begin{align}
 X & =rf  \\
Y & =sf
 \end{align}

$$
for some ${} r,\, s \in \mathbb{R}[X,\, Y] {}$. Therefore, ${} r=a_{1}X {}$ or ${} r=a_{0} {}$, and ${} s=b_{1}Y {}$ or ${} s=b_{0} {}$, with ${} a_{ i},\, b_{ i} \in \mathbb{R} {}$. Therefore, $f$ is constant. Then, either ${} f=0 {}$, which is a contradiction, or ${} f=\lambda \in \mathbb{R}^{\times } {}$, and then ${} (f)=\mathbb{R}[X,\, Y]\neq (X,\, Y) {}$, which is again a contradiction. 
### Definition 1.4: Principle Ideal Domains
We say that $R$ is a *principle ideal domain* (PID) if $R$ is a domain and every ideal is principle, that is, if $I \trianglelefteq R {}$, then 
$$
I=(r)
$$
for some ${} r \in R {}$. 
#### Examples:
$\mathbb{Z}$ is a PID, as is $\mathbb{R}[X]$, as for any ideal $I$, we show that ${} I=(f) {}$, where $f$ has minimal degree amongst elements of $I$. 

Let $I \trianglelefteq R {}$. Since this is a subgroup under addition, we know that
$$
R / I
$$
is a group under addition. We claim that this has a natural multiplication inherited from $R$. In particular, we set
$$
\conj{r} \cdot \conj{s}=\conj{rs}
$$
and we claim that this makes ${} R /I {}$ a ring. To see that this is a well defined binary operation. Suppose that ${} \conj{r'}=\conj{r} {}$, and ${} \conj{s'}=\conj{r} {}$. Then
$$
r+I=r'+I\Rightarrow r-r' \in I,\, s-s' \in I
$$
Then 
$$
rs-r's'=r(s-s')+s'(r-r') \in I
$$
and 
$$
\conj{rs}=\conj{r's'}
$$
Now it is clear to see that ${} R /I {}$ is a ring, as all the required properties are inherited from the multiplication on $R {}$. 

The canonical group projection ${} \pi:R\to{}R /I {}$ mapping ${} r\mapsto \conj{r} {}$ is also a ring homomorphism.

Now suppose that ${} f:R \to{}S {}$ is a ring homomorphism. We know that ${} I=\ker f {}$ is an ideal. Now by the first isomorphism theorem for groups, there exists a unique isomorphism (of groups) ${} \theta:R /\ker f \to{}\im f {}$ mapping ${} \conj{r} \mapsto f(r) {}$. Now since ${} \pi(\conj{1_{R}})=f(1_{r})=1_{S} {}$, and similarly, 
$$
\pi(\conj{rs})=f(rs)=f(r)f(s)=\pi(\conj{r})\pi(\conj{s})
$$
#### Example:
$$
\mathbb{R}[X] / X^{2}+1
$$
Consider the homomorphism given by 
$$
\begin{align}
\varphi :\mathbb{R}[x] & \to{}\mathbb{C} \\
f  & \mapsto f(i)
\end{align}
$$
which is evaluation at $i {}$. Clearly, $\im \varphi=\mathbb{C} {}$, as the polynomial ${} aX+b=ai+b {}$. It is clear that 
$$
(X^{2}+1) \subseteq \ker \varphi \subseteq \mathbb{R}[x]
$$
So, by the first isomorphism theorem for rings, there exists a unique isomorphism
$$
\theta:\frac{\mathbb{R}[X]}{X^{2}+1}\to{}\mathbb{C}
$$
mapping
$$
\conj{f} \mapsto f(i)
$$
#### Exercise:
For any ring homomorphism $f:R\to{}S {}$, and ideal $J \trianglelefteq S {}$, show that $f^{-1}(J) {}$ is an ideal of $R$. 
#### Exercise:
If $I \trianglelefteq R {}$, there exists a bijection
$$
\{ J \trianglelefteq R \mid  I \subseteq J \} \longleftrightarrow \{ \conj{J} \subseteq R /I \mid  \conj{J} \trianglelefteq R/I \}
$$
### Definition 1.5: Prime ideals
We say that an ideal ${} I \trianglelefteq R {}$ is *prime* when
1) $I \neq R$
2) ${} rs \in I\Rightarrow r \in I\text{ or }s \in I {}$. 
#### Note:
The first condition is equivalent to ${} R /I {}$ not being the zero ring
The second condition is equivalent to the condtion that ${} \conj{r} \cdot \conj{s}\neq \conj{0} {}$ if ${} \conj{r},\, \conj{s} \neq \conj{0} {}$, that is, iff ${} R /I {}$ is a domain
### Definition 1.6: Maximal Ideals
1) $I \neq R {}$
2) If $J$ is an ideal 