---
tags:
  - exercises
  - topo_dugundji
date: 
count: 11
---
[[Directory]], [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Topology Dugundji|Subject Directory]]
[[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/1. Sets|🞀🞀]] [[10. Orderings|◀]] [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/12. Ordinals|▶]] [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/152. Locally trivial fiber structures|🞂🞂]]
1. 
Let $N {}$ be the set of element without a maximal element. Then each chain ${} \mathcal{C} {}$ in ${} N {}$ has a upper bound $u {}$ in ${} N$, as if ${} u \notin N {}$, then there exists some maximal $m\succ u$, and by transitivity, ${} m \succ c, c \in \mathcal{C} {}$. Therefore, there exists some maximal element ${} m \in N {}$. Now suppose that $x \succ m$ for some ${} x \in X {}$. If ${} x \in N {}$, then ${} m \succ x {}$. Otherwise, if ${} x \in X-N {}$, then there exists some maximal ${} M \succ x {}$, and ${} m \notin N {}$ by transitivity. Therefore, $m$ is maximal, and so by contradiction ${} N=\varnothing {}$
2. 
a)
If ${} A,\, B {}$ are preordered, then we say that ${} A {}$ continues $B {}$ and write ${} A \sqsubseteq B {}$ iff ${} A \subseteq B {}$, and ${} x \in A {}$ and ${} y \in B {}$ with $y\prec x {}$, then ${} y \in A {}$. It is clear that ${} \sqsubseteq  {}$ is reflexive, transitive, and antisymmetric, so ${} \sqsubseteq  {}$ is a partial order.

Let ${} X {}$ be a preordered set, and let ${} \mathscr{F} \subseteq \mathscr{P}(X) {}$, and ${} \varphi: \mathscr{F}\to{}X {}$ be a map with $\varphi(A)\succ x {}$ for all ${} x \in A {}$, with the following properties:
1. ${} \varnothing  \in \mathscr{F} {}$
2. If ${} \mathscr{A} \subseteq \mathscr{F} {}$ is a chain w.r.t. ${} \sqsubseteq  {}$, we say that $\mathscr{A} {}$ is a non-decreasing chain, and have that ${} \bigcup  \mathscr{A} \in \mathscr{F} {}$.
3. If $A \in \mathscr{F} {}$, then ${} A \cup \{ \varphi(A) \} \in \mathscr{F} {}$.
Then $\mathscr{F}$ is called a $\varphi {}$-spire. 

Let ${} \mathscr{B}$ be a collection of $\varphi$-spires. Then note that
1. ${} \varnothing \in \bigcap \mathscr{B} {}$
2. If ${} \mathscr{A} \subseteq  \bigcap  \mathscr{B} {}$ is a non-decreasing chain, then for each ${} \mathscr{F} \in \mathscr{B} {}$, we have that ${} \mathscr{A} \subseteq \mathscr{F} {}$ is a non-decreasing chain, and so ${} \bigcup \mathscr{A} \in \mathscr{F} {}$, so ${} \bigcup \mathscr{A} \in \bigcap \mathscr{B} {}$
3. If ${} A \in \bigcap \mathscr{B} {}$, then for each ${} \mathscr{F} \in \mathscr{B} {}$, ${} A \in \mathscr{F} {}$, and ${} A \cup  \{ \varphi(A) \} \in \mathscr{F} {}$, so ${} A \cup \{ \varphi(A) \} \in \bigcap \mathscr{B} {}$
So ${} \bigcap \mathscr{B} {}$ is a $\varphi$-spire

Now let ${} \mathscr{M}= \bigcap \{ \mathscr{A} \in \mathscr{P}(\mathscr{P}(X))\mid \mathscr{A} \text{ is a }\varphi \text{-spire} \} {}$. Note that $\mathscr{M}$ is minimal, that is, if ${} \mathscr{A} \subseteq \mathscr{M} {}$ is a $\varphi$-spire, then $\mathscr{A}=\mathscr{M} {}$. Now we wish to show that $\mathscr{M} {}$ is a non-decreasing chain ordered by continuation.

Call ${} M \subseteq  \mathscr{M} {}$ *medial* whenever, for all ${} A  \in \mathscr{M} {}$, ${} A \sqsubseteq  M \vee M \sqsubseteq  A {}$. First, we establish:

Let ${} M \in \mathscr{M} {}$ be medial. Then for all ${} A \in \mathscr{M} {}$, either ${} A \sqsubseteq  M {}$ or ${} M \cup \{ \varphi(M) \} \sqsubseteq A {}$.
Proof:
Let ${} \mathscr{G}_{M}=\{ A \in \mathscr{M} \mid  A \sqsubseteq  M \vee  M \cup \{ \varphi(M) \} \sqsubseteq  A \} {}$. Note:
1. ${} \varnothing \in \mathscr{G}_{M} {}$, as ${} \varnothing  \sqsubseteq  M {}$, vacuously
2. Let ${} \mathscr{A} \subseteq \mathscr{G}_{M} {}$ be an increasing chain. Then, either
	1. There exists some ${} A \in \mathscr{A} {}$ with ${} M \cup \{ \varphi(M) \} \sqsubseteq A {}$. Then ${} M \cup  \{  \varphi(M) \} \sqsubseteq \bigcup \mathscr{A} {}$.
	2. For all ${} A \in \mathscr{A} {}$, ${} A \sqsubseteq  M {}$. Then ${} \bigcup \mathscr{A} \sqsubseteq  M {}$.
3. Let ${} A \in \mathscr{G}_{M} {}$. Then either
	1. ${} M \cup \{ \varphi(M) \} \sqsubseteq  A {}$. Then, clearly, ${} M \cup \{ \varphi(M) \} \sqsubseteq  A \cup \{ \varphi(A) \} {}$, as ${} \varphi(A)\succ a \succ m {}$ for all ${} a \in A,\, m \in M {}$, and so ${} A \cup \{ \varphi(A) \} \in \mathscr{G}_{M} {}$
	2. ${} A \subseteq M {}$. Then, since $M {}$ is medial, and ${} A \cup \{ \varphi (A) \} \in \mathscr{M} {}$, then either
		1. ${} A \cup \{ \varphi(A) \} \sqsubseteq  M {}$. Then clearly  ${} A \cup \{ \varphi(A) \}  \in \mathscr{G}_{M} {}$
		2. ${} M \sqsubseteq  A \cup \{ \varphi(A) \} {}$. Then, since ${} A \sqsubseteq M {}$, then either ${} A=M {}$, or ${} A \cup \{ \varphi(A) \}=M {}$. In either case, then ${} A \cup  \{  \varphi(A) \} \in \mathscr{G}_{M} {}$. 
Therefore, ${} \mathscr{G}_{M}$ is a $\varphi {}$-spire, and since ${} \mathscr{G}_{M} \subseteq \mathscr{M} {}$, and ${} \mathscr{M}$ is minimal, then ${} \mathscr{M}=\mathscr{G}_{M} {}$. 

Now we show that all ${} M \in \mathscr{M} {}$ are medial. First, let ${} \mathscr{G}=\{ M \in \mathscr{M} \mid M \text{ is medial} \} {}$. First, 
1. ${} \varnothing  \in \mathscr{G} {}$, clearly.
2. Let ${} \mathscr{A} \subseteq \mathscr{G} {}$ be an non-decreasing chain. Then, if ${} M \in \mathscr{M} {}$, then since ${} A \in \mathscr{A} {}$ is medial, then either 
	1. For all ${} A \in \mathscr{A} {}$, ${} A \sqsubseteq M {}$. Then ${} \bigcup \mathscr{A} \sqsubseteq M {}$.
	2. There exists some ${} A \in \mathscr{A} {}$ with ${} M \sqsubseteq A {}$. then ${} M \sqsubseteq \bigcup \mathscr{A} {}$
3. Let ${} M \in \mathscr{G} {}$. Let any ${} A \in \mathscr{M} {}$. Since ${} M {}$ is medial, then by the above, either ${} A \sqsubseteq M  {}$, and ${} A \sqsubseteq M \cup \{ \varphi(M) \} {}$, or ${} M \cup \{ \varphi(M) \} \sqsubseteq  A {}$. Therefore, ${} M \cup  \{  \varphi(M) \} {}$ is medial
Therefore, $\mathscr{G}$ is a $\varphi$-spire, and since ${} \mathscr{G} \subseteq \mathscr{M} {}$, then ${} \mathscr{G}=\mathscr{M} {}$, and $\mathscr{M}$ is totally ordered by continuation, and is a non-decreasing chain. Therefore, ${} A=\bigcup \mathscr{M} \in \mathscr{M} {}$, and ${} A \cup \{ \varphi(A) \} \in M {}$. So, $A \cup  \{ \varphi(A) \} \subseteq A {}$, and ${} \varphi(A) \in A {}$.

Now we prove the proper theorem.
Let ${} X {}$ be a preordered set under ${} \succ$, and let ${} \mathscr{F} {}$ be the set of all well ordered non-empty subsets of $X {}$. Given ${} A \in \mathscr{F} {}$, pick ${} a_{A} {}$ as an upper bound of $A$, and set
$$
T_{A}=\{ x \in X \mid  x \succ a_{A} \wedge \neg(a_{A}  \succ  x)  \}
$$
Now suppose that for all ${} A \in \mathscr{F} {}$, ${} T_{A}\neq  \varnothing  {}$. Therefore, by the axiom of choice, there exists a function
$$
c: \mathscr{F} \to{}\bigcup_{A\in \mathscr{F}}T_{A}
$$
with ${} c(A) \in T_{A} {}$. Note that ${} c(A) \succ a {}$ for all ${} a \in A {}$. If we set ${} c(\varnothing )=x_{0} {}$ for some arbitrary ${} x_{0} \in X {}$, then ${} \mathscr{F}' =\mathscr{F} \cup \{  \varnothing  \} {}$ is a $c {}$-spire. In particular, 
1. ${} \varnothing  \in \mathscr{F} {}$
2. If ${} \mathscr{A} \subseteq \mathscr{F}' {}$ is a chain ordered by continuation, then given any ${} a,\, b \in \bigcup \mathscr{A} {}$, there exists well ordered sets ${} A,\, B \in \mathscr{A} {}$ with ${} a \in A {}$, and ${} b \in B {}$. Therefore, ${} a,\, b \in  A \cup B {}$, and so either ${} a \succ b {}$ or ${} b \succ a {}$, so ${} \bigcup \mathscr{A} {}$ is totally ordered. 

	Now let ${} S\subseteq  \bigcup \mathscr{A} {}$. Now for each ${} A \in \mathscr{A}  {}$, let ${} m_{A} {}$ be the first element of ${} S \cap  A {}$. In particular, if ${} A \sqsubseteq B \in \mathscr{A} {}$, then ${} m_{A}=m_{B} {}$. Therefore, since $\mathscr{A}$ is ordered by continuation, then ${} m_{A}=m_{B}=m {}$ for all ${} A,\, B \in \mathscr{A} {}$. Now ${} m \in S {}$, and $m$ is the first element of $S$. Therefore, ${} \bigcup \mathscr{A} {}$ is well ordered, and ${} \bigcup \mathscr{A} \in \mathscr{F}' {}$.
3. Let ${} A \in \mathscr{F}' {}$. Then $c(A)\succ a_{A}\succ a$ for all ${} a \in A {}$. Furthermore, let ${} S \subseteq A \cup \{ c(A) \} {}$. Then either ${} S \cap A {}$ is nonempty, and so has a first element ${} m\prec c(A) {}$, or ${} S=\{ c(A) \} {}$, which clearly has first element $c(A)$. Therefore, ${} A \cup \{ c(A) \} {}$ is well ordered, and ${} A \cup \{ c(A) \} \in \mathscr{F}' {}$. 

Then, due to the above, there exists some ${} A \in \mathscr{M} \subseteq \mathscr{F}' {}$ with ${} c(A) \in A {}$, and ${} c(A)\prec a_{A}$, which is a contradiction. Therefore, there exists some empty ${} T_{A} {}$, and so a maximal element.

Conversely, suppose that the lemma holds. Now let $X {}$ be a set, and let 
$$
\mathscr{F}=\{ (A,\, \prec _{A}) \mid A \subseteq X \wedge (\prec _{A} \text{ well orders } A) \}
$$
We again order $\mathscr{F}$ by propagation. Now let $\mathscr{A}$ be a well ordered subset of $\mathscr{F}$. Then since $\mathscr{A}$ is also a chain, then there exists an upper bound as proved before. Therefore, There is a maximal ${} (A,\, \prec _{A})$, and $A=X {}$, so $X {}$ is well ordered, and the axiom of choice holds.
b)
Suppose the axiom of choice. Then, let ${} F:X\to{}\mathscr{P}(Y) {}$ is such that ${} F(x)\neq \varnothing  {}$ for all ${} x \in X. {}$ Then, due to choice, there exists a function ${} f:X\to{} \bigcup \im F \subseteq Y {}$ with${} f(x) \in F(x) {}$.

Conversely, suppose there exists a function $f:X\to{}Y {}$ with ${} f(x) \in F(x) {}$. Then ${} I=\{ F(x) \mid x \in X \} {}$ is a nonempty family of nonempty sets, and ${} f|\bigcup I {}$ is a choice function, and the axiom of choice holds.
c)
Suppose the axiom of choice. Let $X$ be partially ordered, and let $\mathscr{F}$ be the set of chains on $X$. Then $\mathscr{F}$ is partially ordered by inclusion. Let ${} \mathscr{A} \subseteq \mathscr{F} {}$ be a chain in $\mathscr{F}$. Then if ${} A,\, B \in \bigcup \mathscr{A}$, then there exists some $\mathcal{C} \in \mathscr{A} {}$ with ${} A,\, B \in  \mathcal{C} {}$, and so $A,\, B {}$ are related. Therefore, ${} \bigcup \mathscr{A} {}$ is a chain, and is an upper bound for $\mathscr{A}$, so there exists a maximal element $\mathscr{M}$ containing $\mathscr{A} {}$.

Conversely, if every chain is contained in a maximal chain, then if every chain has an upper bound, then every maximal chain contains it's upper bound, and so that upper bound is a maximum. Therefore, Zorn's lemon holds, as does the axiom of choice. 
d)
Suppose the axiom of choice. Then, suppose that ${} P \subseteq \mathscr{P}(X) {}$ has finite character. Let $\mathscr{A}$ be a chain in $P$. Then, let $F$ be a finite subset of ${} \bigcup \mathscr{A} {}$. For each ${} x \in F {}$, there exists some ${} S(x) \in \mathscr{A} {}$ with ${} x \in S {}$. Since $\mathscr{A} {}$ is a chain, then there exists a set ${} S {}$ containing all ${} S(x)$, and so ${} F \subseteq S {}$, and ${} F \in P {}$. Therefore, ${} \bigcup \mathscr{A} \in P {}$, and $\mathscr{A}$ has an upper bound. Therefore, $P$ has a maximal element. 

Conversely, suppose that the exercise holds. Let $X$ be a partially ordered set, and let $\mathscr{F}$ be the set of all chains in $X$. First, if ${} A \in \mathscr{F} {}$, and ${} F \subseteq A {}$ finite, then $F$ is clearly a chain and ${} F \subseteq \mathscr{F} {}$. 

Now suppose that ${} A \subseteq \mathscr{P}(X) {}$ such that for all finite ${} F \subseteq A {}$, ${} F \in \mathscr{F} {}$. Then, given ${} X,\, Y \in A, {}$ then $\{ X,\, Y \} \in \mathscr{F} {}$, so ${} X \subseteq Y {}$ or ${} Y \subseteq X {}$, and $A$ is totally ordered and ${} A \in \mathscr{F} {}$. Therefore, $\mathscr{F}$ is of finite character, and by hypothesis, $\mathscr{F} {}$ has a maximal chain. Therefore, by part c, the axiom of choice holds.
3. 
Let $\mathscr{F} {}$ be a family of sets in $\mathscr{A} {}$. Then, given ${} A \in \mathscr{A} {}$, we have 2 options:
1. for all ${} F \in \mathscr{F} {}$, ${} A \subseteq F {}$. Then ${} A \subseteq  \bigcap \mathscr{F} {}$
2. There exists a ${} F \in \mathscr{F} {}$ with ${} A\supseteq F {}$. Then ${} \bigcap \mathscr{F} \subseteq A {}$.
Now suppose that ${} \bigcap \mathscr{F} \notin \mathscr{A} {}$. Then as just proved, ${} \mathscr{A} \cup  \bigcap  \mathscr{F} {}$ is a chain properly containing ${} \mathscr{A} {}$, and $\mathscr{A} {}$ is not maximal, which is a contradiction. Therefore, ${} \bigcap  \mathscr{F} \in \mathscr{A} {}$.

First, ${} \prec {}$ is clearly reflexive. Now suppose that ${} x \prec y {}$ and $y\prec z$. Then either ${} x=y {}$, and then ${} x \prec z {}$, or we have $A$ with ${} x \in A {}$ and ${} y \notin A {}$. Also, either ${} y=z {}$ and then ${} x \prec z {}$, or we have $B$ with ${} y \in B {}$ and ${} z \notin B {}$. Then, either ${} A \subseteq B {}$ or ${} B \subseteq A {}$. However, since ${} y \notin A {}$ but ${} y \in B {}$, then ${} A \subseteq B {}$, and ${} x \in B {}$ with ${} z \notin B {}$. Therefore, ${} x \prec z {}$. Therefore, $\prec$ is transitive. 

Now suppose that ${} x \prec y {}$ and ${} y \prec x {}$. Suppose that $x\neq y$. Then ${} x \in A,\, y \notin A {}$ and ${} x \notin B,\, y \in B {}$. Again, ${} A \subseteq B {}$ or ${} B \subseteq A {}$. However, this is impossible. Therefore, ${} x=y {}$, and $\prec$ is antisymmetric. 

Now let ${} x,\, y \in X {}$, with $x\neq y {}$. Then there exists a set ${} A \in \mathscr{A} {}$ containing $x$ as otherwise, ${} \mathscr{A}\cup \left\{ \bigcup \mathscr{A} \cup \{ x \}\right\} {} {}$ would be larger than $\mathscr{A}$. Likewise, there exists a set ${} B \in \mathscr{A} {}$ containing $y {}$. Now suppose that, for all ${} A \in \mathscr{A} {}$, ${} x \in A \iff y \in A {}$. Then 
$$
y \in S=\bigcap \{ A \in \mathscr{A} \mid  x \in A \} \in \mathscr{A}
$$
Now note that ${} S -\{ y \} \notin  \mathscr{A} {}$, by the above condition. However, if ${} A \in \mathscr{A} {}$, then we have 2 options:
1. ${} A \subset S {}$. Then ${} x,\, y \notin A {}$, and so ${} A \subset S-\{ y \} {}$
2. ${} S \subseteq A {}$. Then ${} S-\{ y \} \subseteq A {}$
Now ${} \mathscr{A} \cup \{ S-\{ y \} \} {}$ is a chain strictly containing $\mathscr{A}$, and so $\mathscr{A}$ is not maximal. Therefore, the condition that ${} x \in A \iff y \in A {}$ cannot hold, and there exists a set with either ${} x \in A,\, y \notin A {}$ or ${} y \in A,\,  x \notin A {}$. Therefore, either ${} x \succ y {}$ or ${} y \succ x {}$.

The final part of this problem is broken.
4. 
Let $<$ be a well order of $X$. Define $\prec  {}$as follows: if $aRb {}$, then $a\prec b$. Otherwise, if ${} a <b {}$, then ${} a \prec b {}$, and otherwise ${} b \prec a {}$. Clearly $\prec$ is reflexive. Now let ${} a,\, b,\,  c \in X {}$ with ${} a \prec b {}$ and $b\prec c$. Then either
1. $aRb {}$. Then if $bRc {}$, then $aRc {}$, and ${} a \prec c {}$. Otherwise, if $b<c {}$

For every ${} x \in X {}$, let ${} S(x)=\{  a \in X \mid a R x \} {}$, and if ${} \mathcal{C} {}$ is a chain in $X {}$, then let ${} S(\mathcal{C})=\{ S(x) \mid  x \in \mathcal{C} \} {}$. Note that ${} S(\mathcal{C}) {}$ is still a chain by incluLet ${} \mathscr{F}$ be the set of all chains in $X$. Then, let 
$$
\mathscr{A}=\bigcap \{ \{ S(x) \mid x \in \mathcal{C} \}\mid  \}
$$