---
tags:
  - exercises
  - topo_dugundji
date: 
count: 12
---
[[Directory]], [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Topology Dugundji|Subject Directory]]
[[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/1. Sets|🞀🞀]] [[11. Zorn´s Lemma; Zermelo´s Theorem|◀]] [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/13. Comparability of Ordinals|▶]] [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/152. Locally trivial fiber structures|🞂🞂]]
1. 
First note that ${} \varnothing \in \Sigma {}$, since the empty union belongs to $\Sigma {}$. Then, if ${} \varphi:I(W)\to{}W {}$ is defined by
$$
\varphi(A)=\begin{cases}
a, &  \text{ if }A=W(a) \text{ for some } a \in W \\
m,  & \text{ otherwise}
\end{cases}
$$
where $m {}$ is the first element of $W$, then ${} \Sigma$ is a $\varphi$-tower. Then there exists some ${} A \in \Sigma {}$ with ${} \varphi(A) \in A {}$. Therefore, since ${} a \notin W(a) {}$ for all ${} a \in W {}$, then ${} W \in \Sigma {}$. 
2. 
Let $\prec ,\,<$ be 2 well orderings on ${} \bigcup _{\alpha} A_{\alpha} {}$ which meet the conditions. If ${} x,\, y \in \bigcup _{\alpha}A_{\alpha} {}$, then ${} x \in A_{\alpha} {}$ and ${} y \in A_{\beta} {}$ for some $\alpha,\, \beta {}$. WLOG assume that $A_{\alpha} {}$ is an ideal in $A_{\beta}$. Then if ${} x \prec _{\beta} y {}$, then ${} x \prec y {}$ and $x<y {}$. Likewise if ${} y \prec _{\beta}x {}$. Therefore, ${} \prec{} ={}< {}$, and all well orderings are unique, and one exists.

Let ${} a \in A_{\alpha} {}$ with ${} S=A_{\alpha}(a) {}$ an initial interval. Then let ${} x \in \bigcup _{\alpha}A_{\alpha} {}$ with ${} x \prec a {}$ and $x\neq a$. We have that ${} x \in A_{\beta} {}$, and either:
1. $A_{\beta}$ is an ideal in ${} A_{\alpha} {}$. Then ${} A_{\beta}\subseteq A_{\alpha} {}$, and so ${} x \in S {}$
2. $A_{\alpha}$ is an ideal in $A_{\beta}$. Then ${} x \in A_{\beta}(a)=A_{\alpha}(a) {}$, since ${} a \in A_{\alpha} {}$. 
In either case, ${} x \in S {}$, and $S$ is an initial interval in ${} \bigcup _{\alpha}A_{\alpha} {}$
3. 
First, if ${} a=b {}$, then ${} a,\, b \in A_{\alpha} {}$, and ${} a \prec b {}$. Therefore, $\prec$ is reflexive. 

Now if ${} a,\, b,\, c \in \bigcup _{\alpha}A_{\alpha} {}$ with ${} a \prec b {}$ and ${} b \prec c {}$, then either:
1. ${} a,\, b \in A_{\alpha} {}$ for some ${} \alpha \in \mathscr{A} {}$. Then $$