---
tags:
  - exercises
  - topo_dugundji
date: 
count: 14
---
[[Directory]], [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Topology Dugundji|Subject Directory]]
[[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/1. Sets|🞀🞀]] [[13. Comparability of Ordinals|◀]] [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/15. Ordinal numbers|▶]] [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/152. Locally trivial fiber structures|🞂🞂]]
1. 
2. 
Let ${} R_{x}(\varphi) {}$ with ${} \varphi :\omega(x)\to{}W {}$ defined to be 
$$
R_{x}(\varphi)=\text{the first element of } W - \im \varphi
$$
Since  $W {}$ is infinite and $\im \varphi {}$ is always finite, then ${} R_{x}(\varphi) {}$ always exists. So by transfinite construction there exists some ${} F:\omega\to{}W {}$ with ${} F(0)=m {}$, where $m$ is the first element of $W$, and 
$$
F(x)=R_{x}(F \mid \omega(x))
$$
Now suppose that ${} F(x)=F(y) {}$. WLOG assume that ${} x \leq  y {}$, and that this is the first $x {}$ such that this happens, and the first $y {}$ such that this happens for $x {}$. Then the first element of ${} W-\im (F \mid \omega(x)) {}$ is the same as the first element of ${} W-\im (F \mid \omega(y)) {}$. Therefore, ${} \im (F \mid  \omega(x))=\im (F \mid  \omega(y)) {}$. Since this is the first $x$ where this happens, then ${} F \mid  \omega(x) {}$ is injective, and since ${} y \notin \omega(y) {}$, then ${} F \mid \omega(y)$ is likewise injective. Therefore, ${} x=y {}$, and $F$ is injective. 

Now let ${} I=\im F {}$. Let ${} x \in I {}$, and let ${} y \in W {}$ with ${} y \prec x {}$. Then there exists some ${} a \in \omega {}$ with ${} F(a)=x {}$, and so $x {}$ is the first element of ${} W-\im (F \mid \omega(x)) {}$. Therefore ${} y \in \im (F \mid  \omega(x)) \subseteq \im F {}$, and $I$ is an ideal. 

Finally, let ${} x,\, y \in \omega {}$ with ${} x \leq y {}$. Then ${} \omega(x) \subseteq \omega(y) {}$, and so ${} \im (F \mid  \omega(x)) \subseteq \im (F \mid  \omega(y)) {}$. Therefore, 
$$
W-\im (F \mid  \omega(x)) \supseteq W-\im (F \mid  \omega(y))
$$
and so the first element of the left hand side must be less than or equal to the first element of the right, that is, 
$$
F(x)\prec F(y)
$$
and so ${} F \mid \im F {}$ is an isomorphism, and ${} \omega \leq W {}$
3. 
Let $X$ be a set. Suppose that $X$ is finite, and there exists some ${} Y \subset X {}$ and a bijection ${} \varphi :X\to{}Y {}$. Then we have that $Y$ is finite, and since $|Y|<|X| {}$, but ${} |Y|=|\varphi(X)|=|X| {}$, then we have a contradiction.

Now suppose that $X$ is infinite. Well order $X$ by $\prec$. 