---
tags:
  - exercises
  - topo_dugundji
date: 
count: 16
---
[[Directory]], [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Topology Dugundji|Subject Directory]]
[[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/1. Sets|🞀🞀]] [[15. Ordinal numbers|◀]] [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/17. Cardinal Arithmetic|▶]] [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/152. Locally trivial fiber structures|🞂🞂]]
1. 
Let ${} A {}$ be a finite set totally ordered under $\prec {}$. Let ${} S \subseteq A {}$. Now suppose that $S$ has no first element. Then, for all ${} s \in S {}$, there exists some ${} s\neq t \in S {}$ with ${} t \prec s {}$. This forms an infinite decreasing sequence of unique elements, which clearly cannot exist as ${} A {}$ is finite. 

Now let $A {}$ be an infinite set. Then well order $A$ by $\prec$, and totally order $A$ by $<$, where $a<b {}$ iff ${} b \prec a {}$. Now since $A$ is infinite, then it contains a well ordered set isomorphic to $\omega$ under ${} \prec {}$. Then under $<$, it contains a set isomorphic to $\omega^{*}$, and as proved before, this shows that $<$ is not a well order.
2. 
Let $A$ be the set of all countable subsets of ${} E^{1}$. Then clearly ${} E^{1}\to{f}A {}$ defined by ${} x \mapsto \{ x \} {}$ is an injection. 

Let ${} \prec$ be a well ordering of ${} E^{1}$. First, note that ${} \tan \left( \pi x+\frac{\pi}{2} \right) {}$ maps bijectively from ${} ]0,\, 1[ {}$, and so we have a bijection from ${} A$ to $A' {}$, the set of all countable subsets of ${} ]0,\, 1[ {}$. Now let ${} S \in A' {}$. For each ${} s \in S {}$, we have a binary expansion of $s {}$:
$$
s=\sum _{n=1}^{\infty } a_{n} 2^{-n}
$$
we take ${} a_{n}\neq 1 {}$ for all $n >N {}$ for some $N$. Therefore, ${} a_{n}$ are unique. Now since ${} S {}$ is well ordered and countable, we have a map ${} m:\omega\to{}S {}$, denote it ${} m_{n}$. Then for each ${} m_{n}$, we have the unique binary expansion with digits ${} a_{n,\, k},\, k \in \mathbb{Z}^{+} {}$. Let $B$ be the set of all these digits, and well order them by setting ${} a_{n,\, k} \prec a_{m,\, \ell} {}$ if ${} n+k <m+\ell {}$ or, if ${} n+k=m+\ell {}$, if ${} n \leq m {}$. This is clearly a well ordering. 

Now since $B$ is countable and well ordered, then again we have $d:\omega\to{}B {}$, denoted ${} d_{n}$. Now 
$$
a=\sum _{n=1}^{\infty } d_{n} 10^{-n}
$$
is a real number. Define ${} g:A'\to{}\mathbb{R} {}$ by the above process. Now $g$ is clearly injective, as if ${} a=b {}$, then ${} d_{n}=e_{n} {}$, and since the order on $S$ is unique and the binary expansions are unique, then $S=T {}$. Therefore, ${} \operatorname{Card}A=\operatorname{Card}E^{1} {}$. 
3. 
Let $X {}$ be a totally ordered set under $\prec {}$, and let ${} A\subseteq \mathscr{P}(X) {}$ be the set of all countable subsets of $X. {}$ Suppose that $X$ is not well ordered. Then there exists a subset ${} S \subseteq X {}$ isomorphic to ${} \omega^{*}$. However, since this subset is countable, then it is well ordered, which is a contradiction. Therefore, $X$ is well ordered. 
4. 
Let ${} Q \subseteq \mathscr{L} {}$ be the set of all ordinals such that for each ordinal ${} \underline{\alpha} {}$, there exists a cardinal ${} \aleph_{\underline{\alpha}} {}$. Now if ${} \mathscr{L}(\underline{\alpha}) \subseteq Q$, then let ${} A=\{ \aleph_{\underline{\beta}}\mid \underline{\beta} \in \underline{\alpha} \} {}$. This has ${} \ord(A)=\underline{\alpha} {}$. 