---
tags:
  - exercises
  - topo_dugundji
date: 
count: 14
---
[[Directory]], [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Topology Dugundji|Subject Directory]]
[[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/2.1. Orderings.md|🞀🞀]] [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/2.4. Comparability of Ordinals.md|◀]] [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/2.6. Ordinal numbers.md|▶]] [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/2.9. The ordinal number omega.md|🞂🞂]]
1. 
2. 
Let ${} R_{x}(\varphi) {}$ with ${} \varphi :\omega(x)\to{}W {}$ defined to be 
$$
R_{x}(\varphi)=\text{the first element of } W - \im \varphi
$$
Since  $W {}$ is infinite and $\im \varphi {}$ is always finite, then ${} R_{x}(\varphi) {}$ always exists. So by transfinite construction there exists some ${} F:\omega\to{}W {}$ with ${} F(0)=m {}$, where $m$ is the first element of $W$, and 
$$
F(x)=R_{x}(F \mid \omega(x))
$$
Now suppose that ${} F(x)=F(y) {}$. WLOG assume that ${} x \leq  y {}$, and that this is the first $x {}$ such that this happens, and the first $y {}$ such that this happens for $x {}$. Then the first element of ${} W-\im (F \mid \omega(x)) {}$ is the same as the first element of ${} W-\im (F \mid \omega(y)) {}$. Therefore, ${} \im (F \mid  \omega(x))=\im (F \mid  \omega(y)) {}$. Since this is the first $x$ where this happens, then ${} F \mid  \omega(x) {}$ is injective, and since ${} y \notin \omega(y) {}$, then ${} F \mid \omega(y)$ is likewise injective. Therefore, ${} x=y {}$, and $F$ is injective. 

Now let ${} I=\im F {}$. Let ${} x \in I {}$, and let ${} y \in W {}$ with ${} y \prec x {}$. Then there exists some ${} a \in \omega {}$ with ${} F(a)=x {}$, and so $x {}$ is the first element of ${} W-\im (F \mid \omega(x)) {}$. Therefore ${} y \in \im (F \mid  \omega(x)) \subseteq \im F {}$, and $I$ is an ideal. 

Finally, let ${} x,\, y \in \omega {}$ with ${} x \leq y {}$. Then ${} \omega(x) \subseteq \omega(y) {}$, and so ${} \im (F \mid  \omega(x)) \subseteq \im (F \mid  \omega(y)) {}$. Therefore, 
$$
W-\im (F \mid  \omega(x)) \supseteq W-\im (F \mid  \omega(y))
$$
and so the first element of the left hand side must be less than or equal to the first element of the right, that is, 
$$
F(x)\prec F(y)
$$
and so ${} F \mid \im F {}$ is an isomorphism, and ${} \omega \leq W {}$
3. 
Let $X$ be a set. Suppose that $X$ is finite, and there exists some ${} Y \subset X {}$ and a bijection ${} \varphi :X\to{}Y {}$. Then we have that $Y$ is finite, and since $|Y|<|X| {}$, but ${} |Y|=|\varphi(X)|=|X| {}$, then we have a contradiction.

Now suppose that $X$ is infinite. Well order $X$ by $\prec {}$. For each ${} x \in X {}$, and ${} \varphi:X(x)\to{}X {}$, define
$$
R_{x}(\varphi)=\text{the second element of }X-\im \varphi
$$
Then there is a unique ${} F:X\to{}X {}$ mapping ${} F(m)=n {}$, where $m$ is the first and $n$ is the second of $X {}$, and otherwise fulfilling
$$
F(x)=R_{x}(F \mid  X(x))
$$
Analogous arguments to above show that $F {}$ is a bijection from $X {}$ to $\im F {}$. However, ${} m \notin \im F {}$, and so ${} \im F \subset X {}$.
4. 
Let ${} \mathscr{I}$ be the set of all ideals contained in $Q$. Then let $\mathscr{A}$ be a chain in $\mathscr{I}$ ordered by inclusion. Now ${} \bigcup \mathscr{A} {}$ is an ideal contained in $Q$, and is clearly an upper bound for $\mathscr{A}$. Therefore, there exists some maximal ideal contained in $Q$. Clearly, this ideal is equal to ${} Q, {}$ as otherwise there would exist one between it and $Q {}$, and so ${} Q$ itself is an ideal.

Now since ${} Q \subseteq Q {}$, if $Q \neq E {}$, then there would exist an ideal $R\neq Q$ with ${} Q \subseteq R \subseteq Q {}$, which is a contradiction. Therefore, $Q=E {}$.
5. 
Suppose that ${} E$ is well ordered. Then ${} 5.1 {}$ holds for $E$.

Now suppose that ${} 5.1 {}$ holds for $E$. Order well ordered subsets of $E$ by propagation, and let $\mathscr{A}$ be a chain. Then as proved before, $\mathscr{A}$ has an upper bound and so there exists a maximal well ordered subset of $E$, call it $M$. Now note that if ${} E(x) \subseteq M {}$, then ${} x \in M {}$, as otherwise, ${} M \cup \{ x \} {}$ adjoined at the end is a greater well ordered subset. Therefore, $M=E {}$, and $E {}$ is well ordered. 
6. 
Suppose that a totally ordered set $X {}$ contains a subset ${} I {}$ isomorphic to ${} \omega^{*}$. Then that subset has no first element, as $\omega^{*} {}$ has no first element. Therefore, $X$ is not well ordered. 

Now suppose that a totally ordered set $X$ contains no subset $I$ isomorphic to $\omega^{*}$. Then if ${} S \subseteq X {}$, suppose that $S$ has no first element. Then, for each ${} x \in S {}$, there exists some ${} y \in S {}$ with ${} y\prec x {}$ and ${} y \neq x {}$. In fact, there exists some ${} L:S\to{}S {}$ with ${} L(x)\prec x {}$ and ${} L(x)\neq x {}$. Now, for each ${} n \in \omega {}$, and ${} \varphi:\omega(x)\to{}S {}$, then since $\im \varphi {}$ is finite, then it is well ordered and has a first element, and we may define
$$
R_{x}(\varphi)=L(\text{the first element of }\im \varphi)
$$
Then there exists some unique ${} F: \omega\to{}S {}$ such that ${} F(x) \prec x {}$ and ${} F(x) \neq x {}$. If ${} F(x)=F(y) {}$, then it is clear that ${} x=y {}$. 

Now define ${} G:\omega^{*}\to{}S {}$ by ${} G(x)=F(-x) {}$. Now if ${} x \prec y {}$ in $\omega^{*}$, then ${} -x \succ -y {}$ in $\omega$. Now ${} L^{n}(F(-y))=F(-x) {}$ for some ${} n \in \omega {}$, by the definition of $F$, and so ${} F(-x)\prec F(-y) {}$, so ${} G(x)\prec G(y) {}$. Therefore, $G$ is an isomorphism, which is a contradiction, and so $S$ has a first element and $X {}$ is well ordered.
