---
tags:
  - exercises
  - topo_dugundji
date: 
count: 16
---
[[Directory]], [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Topology Dugundji|Subject Directory]]
[[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/2.1. Orderings.md|🞀🞀]] [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/2.6. Ordinal numbers.md|◀]] [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/2.8. Cardinal Arithmetic.md|▶]] [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/2.9. The ordinal number omega.md|🞂🞂]]
1. 
Let ${} A {}$ be a finite set totally ordered under $\prec {}$. Let ${} S \subseteq A {}$. Now suppose that $S$ has no first element. Then, for all ${} s \in S {}$, there exists some ${} s\neq t \in S {}$ with ${} t \prec s {}$. This forms an infinite decreasing sequence of unique elements, which clearly cannot exist as ${} A {}$ is finite. 

Now let $A {}$ be an infinite set. Then well order $A$ by $\prec$, and totally order $A$ by $<$, where $a<b {}$ iff ${} b \prec a {}$. Now since $A$ is infinite, then it contains a well ordered set isomorphic to $\omega$ under ${} \prec {}$. Then under $<$, it contains a set isomorphic to $\omega^{*}$, and as proved before, this shows that $<$ is not a well order.
2. 
Let $A$ be the set of all countable subsets of ${} E^{1}$. Then clearly ${} E^{1}\to{f}A {}$ defined by ${} x \mapsto \{ x \} {}$ is an injection. 

Let ${} \prec$ be a well ordering of ${} E^{1}$. First, note that ${} \tan \left( \pi x+\frac{\pi}{2} \right) {}$ maps bijectively from ${} ]0,\, 1[ {}$, and so we have a bijection from ${} A$ to $A' {}$, the set of all countable subsets of ${} ]0,\, 1[ {}$. Now let ${} S \in A' {}$. For each ${} s \in S {}$, we have a binary expansion of $s {}$:
$$
s=\sum _{n=1}^{\infty } a_{n} 2^{-n}
$$
we take ${} a_{n}\neq 1 {}$ for all $n >N {}$ for some $N$. Therefore, ${} a_{n}$ are unique. Now since ${} S {}$ is well ordered and countable, we have a map ${} m:\omega\to{}S {}$, denote it ${} m_{n}$. Then for each ${} m_{n}$, we have the unique binary expansion with digits ${} a_{n,\, k},\, k \in \mathbb{Z}^{+} {}$. Let $B$ be the set of all these digits, and well order them by setting ${} a_{n,\, k} \prec a_{m,\, \ell} {}$ if ${} n+k <m+\ell {}$ or, if ${} n+k=m+\ell {}$, if ${} n \leq m {}$. This is clearly a well ordering. 

Now since $B$ is countable and well ordered, then again we have $d:\omega\to{}B {}$, denoted ${} d_{n}$. Now 
$$
a=\sum _{n=1}^{\infty } d_{n} 10^{-n}
$$
is a real number. Define ${} g:A'\to{}\mathbb{R} {}$ by the above process. Now $g$ is clearly injective, as if ${} a=b {}$, then ${} d_{n}=e_{n} {}$, and since the order on $S$ is unique and the binary expansions are unique, then $S=T {}$. Therefore, ${} \operatorname{Card}A=\operatorname{Card}E^{1} {}$. 
3. 
Let $X {}$ be a totally ordered set under $\prec {}$, and let ${} A\subseteq \mathscr{P}(X) {}$ be the set of all countable subsets of $X. {}$ Suppose that $X$ is not well ordered. Then there exists a subset ${} S \subseteq X {}$ isomorphic to ${} \omega^{*}$. However, since this subset is countable, then it is well ordered, which is a contradiction. Therefore, $X$ is well ordered. 
4. 
Let ${} Q \subseteq \mathscr{L} {}$ be the set of all ordinals such that for each ordinal ${} \underline{\alpha} {}$, there exists a cardinal ${} \aleph_{\underline{\alpha}} {}$. Now if ${} \mathscr{L}(\underline{\alpha}) \subseteq Q$, then if ${} A=\{ \aleph_{\underline{\beta}} \mid  \underline{\beta} \in \mathscr{L}(\underline{\alpha}) \} {}$, then ${} \mathscr{K} - A {}$ is non empty, as every cardinal has a greater cardinal, and has first element ${} \bar{\aleph} {}$. Then ${} \bar{\aleph}=\aleph_{\underline{\alpha}} {}$. 
5. 
Let $\aleph {}$ be an infinite cardinal. Suppose, considered as an ordinal, there exists a predecessor ${} \underline{\alpha} {}$. Then ${} \underline{\alpha}+\underline{1}= \aleph {}$, and so ${} \aleph(\underline{\alpha})=\aleph {}$, which is a contradiction. Therefore, $\aleph$ is a limit ordinal
6. 
Let ${} A,\, B \subseteq X {}$. Now if ${} a,\, b \in \underline{2}=\{ 0,\, 1 \} {}$, then ${} a\cdot b=1 {}$ iff ${} a=1  {}$ and ${} b=1 {}$. Then ${} x \in A \cap B {}$ iff ${} x \in A {}$ and ${} x \in B {}$, so iff ${} c_{A}(x)=1 {}$ and ${} c_{B}(x)=1 {}$, so iff ${} c_{A}(x)\cdot c_{B}(x)=1 {}$. 

Now if ${} x \in A \cup B {}$, then ${} x \in A {}$ or ${} x \in B {}$, and ${} c_{A}(x)=1 {}$ or ${} c_{B}(x)=1 {}$. This implies that ${} c_{A}(x)+c_{B}(x) \geq 1 {}$. However, since ${} c_{A \cup B}(x)\leq 1 {}$, then we must subtract the case when ${} x \in A {}$ and ${} x \in B {}$, that is, ${} c_{A \cap  B}(x)=c_{A}(x)+c_{B}(x)-c_{A \cap B}(x) {}$

Suppose that for ${} n=k {}$, then given ${} A_{i} \subseteq X {}$ with $1\leq i\leq k$, we have 
$$
c_{\bigcup_{i=1}^{k}A_{i}}=1-\prod_{i=1}^{k}(1-c_{A_{i}}) 
$$
Now given ${} A_{i} \subseteq X {}$ with ${} 1 \leq i\leq k+1 {}$, we have 
$$
\begin{align}
c_{\bigcup_{i=1}^{k+1} A_{i} }=c_{A_{k+1} \cup  \bigcup_{i=1}^{k} A_{i}} & = c_{A_{k+1}}+c_{\bigcup_{i=1}^{k} A_{i}}-c_{A_{k+1}}\cdot c_{\bigcup_{i=1}^{k} A_{i}}\\
 & =c_{A_{k+1}}+1-\prod_{i=1}^{k} (1-c_{A_{i}})-c_{A_{k+1}}\cdot (1-\prod_{i=1}^{k} (1-c_{A_{i}})) \\
 & =c_{A_{k+1}}-c_{A_{k+1}}+1-\prod_{i=1}^{k} (1-c_{A_{i}})+c_{A_{k+1}}\prod_{i=1}^{k} (1-c_{A_{i}}) \\
 & =1+(c_{A_{k+1}}-1)\prod_{i=1}^{k} (1-c_{A_{i}}) \\
 & =1-\prod_{i=1}^{k+1} (1-c_{A_{i}})
\end{align}
$$
and so by induction the formula holds, as it holds for ${} n=1 {}$. 

Finally, if ${} c \in Q {}$, then either ${} x \in A-B {}$ or ${} x \in B-A {}$, as they are disjoint. Therefore, either ${} x \in A {}$ or ${} x \in B {}$, and so ${} c_{Q}=c_{A}+c_{B} {}$
7. 
Let $X,\, Y {}$ be 2 sets with injections $f:X\to{}Y {}$ and ${} g :Y\to{}X {}$. Then there exist sets $X_{1},\, X_{2} {}$ and $Y_{1},\, Y_{2} {}$ with ${} X=X_{1} \cup X_{2} {}$ and ${} Y=Y_{1} \cup Y_{2} {}$, and ${} f(X_{1})=Y_{1} {}$, and $g(Y_{2})=X_{2} {}$. Therefore, $f \mid X_{1} {}$ is a bijection, as is $g \mid Y_{2} {}$, and so consider ${} h=(g\mid Y_{2})^{-1} {}$. Then, define $\theta:X\to{}Y {}$ by
$$
\theta(x)=\begin{cases}
f(x), & \text{if }x \in X_{1} \\
h(x), & \text{if } x\in X_{2}
\end{cases}
$$
Now since ${} f \mid X_{1} {}$ and ${} h {}$ are bijections, then $\theta$ is a bijection. 
8. 
Let ${} x \in \mathbb{Z}^{+} {}$. Let ${} n \in \mathbb{Z}^{+} {}$ be the smallest ${} n$ such that ${} \frac{n(n+1)}{2}\geq x {}$. Then let ${} q=\frac{n(n+1)}{2}-x+1 {}$, and ${} p=n-q+1 {}$. Now
$$
\begin{align}
 f(p,\, q) & =n-q+1+\frac{1}{2}(n-q+1+q-1)(n-q+1+q-2)   \\
 & =n-\frac{1}{2}n(n+1)+x-1+1+\frac{1}{2}(n)(n-1) \\
 & =x
 \end{align}
$$
Now suppose that ${} f(p,\, q)=f(r,\, s)=x {}$. Note that ${} \frac{(p-1)(p-2)}{2}+1\leq f(p-q,\, q)\leq \frac{p(p-1)}{2} {}$, for ${} p \in \mathbb{Z}^{+} {}$, ${} 1\leq q\leq p-1 {}$, then
$$
\begin{align}
 f(p-q,\, q)  & =p-q+\frac{1}{2}(p-q+q-1)(p-q+q-2) \\
 & =p-q+\frac{1}{2}(p-1)(p-2) \\
 & \Rightarrow \frac{(p-1)(p-2)}{2}+1\leq \frac{1}{2}p(p-1)+1-q \leq \frac{p(p-1)}{2}
 \end{align}
$$
Therefore, there exists exactly one ${} n$ such that ${} f(n-t,\, t)=x {}$. Therefore, ${} p+q=r+s {}$. Now note that
$$
f(n-t,\, t)=\frac{1}{2}n(n-1)+1-t
$$
and so if ${} f(n-t,\, t)=x {}$, then there exists some unique ${} t=x-\frac{1}{2}n(n-1)-1 {}$ such that ${} f(n-t,\, t)=x {}$. Therefore, ${} q=s {}$ and ${} p=r {}$, and $f$ is injective. 
