---
tags:
  - exercises
  - topo_dugundji
date: 2024-11-02
count: 22
---
[[Directory]], [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Topology Dugundji|Subject Directory]]
[[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/3.1. Topological spaces.md|🞀🞀]] [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/3.9. Topologizing of sets.md|◀]] [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/3.11. Topologizing with preassigned elementary operations.md|▶]] [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/3.12. Gfi, Fsigma and Borel sets.md|🞂🞂]]
1. 
a)
$$
\begin{align}
\conj{Q} & =E^{1} \\
Q' & =E^{1} \\
\Int(Q) & =\mathscr{C}\conj{\mathscr{C}Q}=\mathscr{C}E^{1}=\varnothing   \\
\Fr(Q) & =\conj{Q} \cap  \conj{\mathscr{C}Q}=E^{1} \cap E^{1}=E^{1}
\end{align}
$$
b)
Suppose that ${} x \notin C {}$. Then the trinary expansion of $x {}$ with digits ${} a_{i} {}$ has some first ${} 1 {}$ at index $N {}$. Let ${} y \in E^{1} {}$ with
$$
y=\sum _{1}^{N}a_{n} 3^{-n}+\sum_{N+1}^{\infty } b_{n} 3^{-n}
$$
for any ${} b_{i} \in \{ 0,\, 1,\, 2 \} {}$ such that, given $k\geq 1 {}$, there exists some $i>k {}$ such that ${} b_{i}\neq 0 {}$, and the same such that ${} b_{i}\neq 2 {}$. Then the set of all such ${} y$, call it ${} Y {}$, is open, as if ${} y \in Y {}$, then
$$
a=\sum _{1}^{N}a_{n}3^{-n} < y<\sum_{1}^{N-1}a_{n} 3^{-n}+(a_{N}+1)3^{-N}=b
$$
and if ${} y \in (a,\, b) {}$, then ${} y \in Y {}$. Therefore, $Y$ is open. Now every element of $y$ contains a $1$ in it's trinary expansion, and so is disjoint from $C$. Therefore, $C$ is closed and ${} \conj{C}=C {}$. 

Since $C$ is closed, then ${} C' \subseteq C {}$. Suppose that ${} x \in C {}$, and let ${} A(x)$ be a neighbourhood of $x$. We may assume that ${} A(x)$ is an open interval, and so ${} A(x)=(x-\varepsilon,\, x+\varepsilon) {}$. Now let ${} N \in \mathbb{N} {}$ with ${} -N < \log _{3}(\varepsilon) {}$. Then if the digits of the trinary expansion of $x$ are ${} a_{i}$, then let 
$$
y=\sum _{1}^{N} a_{n}3^{-n}+|2-a_{N+1}|\cdot 3^{-N+1}+\sum _{N+2}^{\infty }a_{n}3^{-n}
$$
and so ${} y \in A(x) {}$ and ${} y \neq x {}$. Therefore, ${} x \in C' {}$, and ${} C'=C {}$. 

Let ${} A=(a,\, b) {}$ with $a<b {}$ be an open interval. Then $A$ contains an element with a digit $1$ in it's trinary expansion, as they are between those with digits $0$ and $2$ at the same index. Therefore, ${} A \not \subseteq C {}$, and ${} \Int(C)=\varnothing  {}$. 

Since ${} \Int(C)=\varnothing  {}$, then ${} \mathscr{C} \conj{\mathscr{C}C}=\varnothing {}$, and ${} \conj{\mathscr{C}C}=E^{1} {}$. Therefore, 
$$
\Fr(C)=\conj{C} \cap  E^{1}=C
$$
c) skip
d) skip
2. Skip
3. 
Let ${} s=\sup A {}$. Then, for each neighbourhood of $s$, we may suppose that this is an interval $U$, then $U$ contains elements less than $s$. If none of these elements are elements of $A$, then $s$ is not a least upper bound. Therefore, ${} s \in \conj{A} {}$.

${} s \in A' {}$ if $s$ is not isolated in $A {}$, sort of by definition.
4. 
Suppose that $G {}$ is open. Now if ${} x \in \conj{G \cap  \conj{A}} {}$, then every neighbourhood of $x {}$ contains a point of ${} G {}$ and ${} \conj{A} {}$. Therefore, every neighbourhood of $x$ contains a point of $G$, and every neighbourhood of that point contains a point of $A$. In particular, suppose that $U$ is a neighbourhood of $x$, then we have some ${} y \in U {}$ such that ${} y \in G {}$ and every neighbourhood $V$ of $y$ contains a point ${} z \in A {}$. Since $G$ is open, then ${} G \cap  U {}$ contains a point ${} z' \in A {}$, and since ${} z' \in G {}$, then every neighbourhood of $x$ contains some point of ${} G \cap  A {}$, and so ${} x \in \conj{G \cap  A} {}$. 

Conversely, if ${} x \in \conj{G \cap A} {}$, then there exists some neighbourhood $U$ of $x$ with ${} y \in U {}$ with ${} y \in G {}$ and ${} y \in A \subseteq \conj{A} {}$, and so ${} y \in G \cap \conj{A} {}$, and ${} x \in \conj{G \cap  \conj{A}} {}$. Therefore, ${} \conj{G \cap  \conj{A}}=\conj{G \cap A} {}$. 

Conversely, suppose that ${} \conj{G \cap  A}=\conj{ G \cap  \conj{A}} {}$ for all ${} A \subseteq  X {}$. Then if $A=\mathscr{C}G$, then since ${} G \cap \mathscr{C}G =\varnothing  {}$, then ${} G \cap  \conj{\mathscr{C}G}=\varnothing  {}$. Therefore, if ${} x \in \conj{\mathscr{C}G} {}$, then ${} x \notin G {}$, and so ${} x \in \mathscr{C}G {}$. Therefore, ${} \conj{\mathscr{C}G}=\mathscr{C}G {}$, and so $G$ is open.
5. skip
6. skip
7. skip
8. 
Suppose that ${} \Fr(A)=\varnothing  {}$. Then ${} \conj{A} \cap  \conj{\mathscr{C}A}=\varnothing  {}$, and so if ${} x \in \conj{A} {}$, then ${} x \notin \conj{\mathscr{C}A} \supseteq \mathscr{C}A {}$, and so ${} x \in A {}$. Therefore, $A$ is closed. A similar proof shoes that $\mathscr{C}A$ is closed and so $A {}$ is open.
9. 
a)
$$
\begin{align}
 \Fr(\Fr(\Fr(A)))  & =\conj{\Fr(\Fr(A))} \cap  \conj{\mathscr{C}\Fr(\Fr(A))} \\
 & =\Fr(\Fr(A)) \cap  \conj{\mathscr{C} (\conj{\Fr(A)}\cap \conj{\mathscr{C} \Fr(A)})} \\
 & =\Fr(\Fr(A)) \cap  \conj{\mathscr{C} \Fr(A) \cup \Int(\Fr(A))} \\
& =\Fr(\Fr(A)) \cap  \conj{\mathscr{C}\Fr(A)} \\
 & =\Fr(\Fr(A)) \cap  \mathscr{C} \Int(\Fr(A)) \\
 & =\Fr( \Fr(A)) \cap  \mathscr{C} \varnothing  \\
 & =\Fr( \Fr(A))
 \end{align}
$$
b)
$$
\begin{align}
\Fr(\Int(A)) & = \conj{\Int(A)} \cap  \conj{\mathscr{C}\Int(A)} \\
 & =\conj{\mathscr{C}\conj{\mathscr{C}A}}\cap \conj{\mathscr{C}A} \\
 & \subseteq  \conj{\mathscr{C}\mathscr{C}A} \cap  \conj{\mathscr{C}A} \\
 & \subseteq \Fr(A)
\end{align}
$$
c)
$$
\begin{align}
\Int(A-B) & =\mathscr{C} \conj{\mathscr{C}(A-B)} \\
 & =\mathscr{C}\conj{\mathscr{C}B-\mathscr{C}A} \\
 & \subseteq  \mathscr{C} (\conj{\mathscr{C}B}-\conj{\mathscr{C}A}) \\
 & \subseteq  \mathscr{C} \conj{\mathscr{C}A}-\mathscr{C} \conj{ \mathscr{C}B} \\
 & \subseteq \Int(A)-\Int(B)
\end{align}
$$
10. skip
11. 
Suppose that $X$ is the only dense set in $X$. Then each ${} X-\{ x \} \subseteq X {}$ must be closed, as otherwise ${} \conj{X-\{ x \}}\neq X-\{ x \} {}$, and therefore, ${} \conj{X-\{ x \}}=X {}$. Therefore, ${} \{ x \} {}$ is open, and the space is discrete. 
12. skip
13. 
First, note that
$$
\conj{D \cap  G} \subseteq  \conj{G} \cap  \conj{D}=\conj{G} \cap  X=\conj{G}
$$
Now let ${} x \in \conj{G} {}$. Then every neighbourhood ${} V$ of $x$ shares a point with $G {}$. In particular, ${} V \cap G {}$ is non-empty and open. Therefore, since ${} V \cap G {}$ contains a non-empty basic open set, then ${} V \cap  G {}$ contains a point of $D$, and so $V$ contains a point of ${} D \cap  G {}$, and so ${} x \in \conj{D \cap  G} {}$. 
14. 
No, consider ${} X=\{ 0,\, 1,\, 2 \} {}$, let ${} D=\{ 0,\, 2 \} {}$ and let ${} \mathscr{B}=\{ \{ 0,\, 1 \},\, \{ 1,\, 2 \} \} {}$. Then ${} \mathscr{T}=\{ \varnothing ,\, \{ 1\},\, \{ 0,\, 1 \},\, \{ 1,\, 2 \},\, X \} {}$, and the neighbourhood ${} \{ 1 \} {}$ of $1$ is disjoint from $D$. Therefore, ${} \conj{D}=D {}$.
15. skip
16. skip
17. 
Note that if ${} (a,\, b)=x \in \conj{A \times B} {}$, then if $V$ is a neighbourhood of $x$, then $V$ shares a point with ${} A \times B {}$. Therefore, ${} V=W \times U {}$, and $W$ shares a point with $A$ and $U$ shares a point with $B$. Therefore, ${} a \in \conj{A} {}$ and ${} b \in \conj{B} {}$, so ${} x \in \conj{A} \times  \conj{B} {}$. The converse is clear by reversing the logic. 

Now
$$
\begin{align}
\Int(A \times  B) & =\mathscr{C} \conj{\mathscr{C}(A \times  B)} \\
 & =\mathscr{C} \conj{(\mathscr{C}A \times Y) \cup  (X \times  \mathscr{C}B)} \\
 & =\mathscr{C}(\conj{\mathscr{C}A \times  Y} \cup  \conj{ X \times  \mathscr{C}B}) \\
 & =\mathscr{C} \conj{\mathscr{C}A \times  Y} \cap  \mathscr{C} \conj{X \times  \mathscr{C}B} \\
 & =\mathscr{C}(\conj{\mathscr{C}A} \times Y ) \cap  \mathscr{C}(X \times  \conj{\mathscr{C}B}) \\
 & =((\mathscr{C} \conj{\mathscr{C}A} \times Y) \cup (X \times  \mathscr{C}Y) ) \cap  ((\mathscr{C}X \times  Y )\cup (X \times  \mathscr{C} \conj{\mathscr{C}A})) \\
 & =(\Int(A) \times Y) \cap  (X \times  \Int(B)) \\
 & =\Int(A) \times  \Int(B)
\end{align}
$$
and
$$
\begin{align}
\Fr(A \times B) & =\conj{A \times  B} \cap  \conj{\mathscr{C} (A \times  B)} \\
 & =(\conj{A} \times  \conj{B}) \cap  \conj{\mathscr{C}A \times Y \cup  X \times \mathscr{C}B} \\
 & =(\conj{A} \times  \conj{B}) \cap (\conj{\mathscr{C}A \times Y} \cup  \conj{X \times  \mathscr{C}B}) \\
 & =(\conj{A} \times  \conj{B} \cap  \conj{\mathscr{C}A} \times \conj{Y}) \cup (\conj{A} \times  \conj{B} \cap  \conj{X} \times  \conj{\mathscr{C}B}) \\
 & =(\Fr(A) \times \conj{B}) \cup  (\conj{A} \times  \Fr(B))
\end{align}
$$
18. skip
19. skip
20. skip
21. 
a)
Let $A {}$ be nowhere dense. Then since ${} A \subseteq \conj{A} {}$, then
$$
\begin{align}
 A  & \subseteq \conj{A}   \\
\mathscr{C}A &  \supseteq \mathscr{C} \conj{A} \\
\conj{\mathscr{C}A}  & \supseteq  \conj{\mathscr{C}\conj{A}}  \\
\mathscr{C}\conj{\mathscr{C}A}  & \subseteq  \mathscr{C}\conj{\mathscr{C}\conj{A}} 
 \end{align}
$$
and so 
$$
\Int(A) \subseteq \Int(\conj{A}) =\varnothing 
$$
and so ${} \Int(A)=\varnothing  {}$, and $\mathscr{C}A$ is dense.
b)
Suppose that $A$ is nowhere dense. Then 
$$
\mathscr{C} \conj{ \mathscr{C} \conj{A}}=\varnothing 
$$
and so ${} \conj{\mathscr{C}\conj{A}}=X {}$, and since ${} A \subseteq X {}$, then ${} A \subseteq \conj{\mathscr{C}\conj{A}} {}$.

Conversely, suppose that ${} A \subseteq  \conj{\mathscr{C}\conj{A}} {}$. Then ${} \conj{A} \subseteq  \conj{\mathscr{C} \conj{A}} {}$, and ${} \mathscr{C}\conj{A} \supseteq  \Int(\conj{A}) {}$. However, ${} \Int(\conj{A}) \subseteq \conj{A} {}$. Therefore, ${} \Int(\conj{A})=\varnothing  {}$, and $A$ is nowhere dense. 
c)
Let $A$ be nowhere dense and let $B$ be residual. Now
$$
\begin{align}
 \Int(A \cup B) \subseteq \Int(\conj{A} \cup B) & =\mathscr{C} \conj{\mathscr{C}(\conj{A} \cup B)}  \\
  & =\mathscr{C} \conj{\mathscr{C} \conj{A} \cap  \mathscr{C}B} \\
 
 \end{align}
$$
Let ${} x \in X {}$, and let $V$ be a neighbourhood of $x$. Now ${} V \cap  \mathscr{C}\conj{A} {}$ is non-empty, since $A$ is nowhere dense, and is also a neighbourhood of $x$. Therefore, ${} V \cap \mathscr{C}\conj{A} \cap  \mathscr{C}B {}$ is also non-empty, since $B$ is residual. Therefore, ${} x \in \conj{\mathscr{C}(\conj{A} \cup B)}\subseteq  \conj{\mathscr{C}(A \cup B)} {}$, and so ${} A \cup  B {}$ is residual.
d)
Let $A {}$ be a closed (or open) set. Suppose that ${} V \subseteq \Fr(A) {}$ is an open set. If ${} A$ is closed, then ${} A=\Int(A) \cup \Fr(A) {}$ is a disjoint union. Therefore, ${} V \subseteq \Int(A) {}$, but since $\Int(A) {}$ and $\Fr(A)$ are disjoint, then ${} V=\varnothing  {}$, and ${} \Int(\conj{\Fr(A)})=\varnothing  {}$, and $\Fr(A)$ is nowhere dense. 

Now if $A$ is open, then $\mathscr{C}A$ is closed, and $\Fr(A)=\Fr(\mathscr{C}A) {}$, and so $\Fr(A)$ is nowhere dense. 