---
tags:
  - exercises
  - topo_dugundji
date: 
count: 29
---
[[Directory]], [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Topology Dugundji|Subject Directory]]
[[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/3.1. Topological spaces.md|🞀🞀]] [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/3.10. Continuous maps into E1.md|◀]] [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/3.12. Homeomorphism.md|▶]] [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/3.12. Homeomorphism.md|🞂🞂]]
1. 
a)
Consider the set of open squares on ${} \mathbb{R}^{2} {}$ as a basis for the topology on $\mathbb{R}^{2} {}$. Now if ${} S \subseteq \mathbb{R}^{2} {}$ is an open square, then ${} S=\{ (x,\, y) \in \mathbb{R}^{2} \mid a_{1}<x<b_{1},\, a_{2}<y<b_{2}\}  {}$, and ${} p(S)=(a_{1},\, b_{1}) {}$ is open, therefore, $p$ is open
b)
Clearly ${} S={} \{ (x,\, y) \in \mathbb{R}^{2} \mid xy=1\} {}$ is closed, as it is a boundary set. Suppose that ${} (0, a) \in S {}$. Then ${} a\cdot 0=1 {}$, which is a contradiction, so ${} 0 \notin p(S) {}$. However, given ${} 0\neq x \in \mathbb{R} {}$, we have ${} \left( x,\, \frac{1}{x} \right) \in S {}$, and so ${} p(S)=\mathbb{R}-\{ 0 \} {}$, and since ${} \{ 0 \} {}$ is closed, then $p(S)$ is open. Therefore, $p {}$ is not closed. 
2. skip
3. skip
4. skip
5. 
Clearly, ${} |f(a)|\leq \sup \{ |f(x)| \mid  x \in A \}=M {}$. Now let ${} a \in \Int(A) {}$. Then there exists some open ball ${} f(a) \in B(f(a);\epsilon) \subseteq f(A) {}$. Therefore, ${} |f(a)|+\epsilon\leq M {}$, and so ${} |f(a)|<M {}$.
6. 
Let $f:X\to{}Y {}$ be open. Then
$$
\begin{align}
 f^{-1}(\Fr(B)) & =  f^{-1}(\conj{B} \cap  \conj{\mathscr{C}B}) \\
 & =f^{-1}(\conj{B}) \cap  f^{-1}(\conj{\mathscr{C}B})
 \end{align}
$$
Let ${} B \subseteq Y {}$. Then if ${} x \in f^{-1}(\Fr(B)) {}$ and if ${} U$ is an neighbourhood of $x$, then ${} V=f(U) {}$ is an neighbourhood of ${} f(x)$. Then ${} V \cap  B \neq \varnothing {}$, and ${} V \cap  \mathscr{C}B\neq \varnothing  {}$ and therefore, ${} f^{-1}(V \cap  B) \neq \varnothing \neq f^{-1}(V \cap  \mathscr{C}B) {}$. Now ${} W=f^{-1}(f(U)) {}$, and ${} U \subseteq W {}$. 

Suppose that ${} f^{-1}(\conj{B}) \subseteq \conj{f^{-1}(B)} {}$. Then let ${} A \subseteq X {}$, and so ${} B=f(f^{-1}(A)) {}$

Suppose that ${} f^{-1}(\Fr(B)) \subseteq \Fr(f^{-1}(B)) {}$. Now let ${} A \subseteq X {}$ be open. Then let ${} B=f(A) {}$, and so ${} A \subseteq f^{-1}(B)=f^{-1}(\Fr(B)) \cup f^{-1}(\Int(B)) \subseteq \Fr(f^{-1}(B)) \cup  f^{-1}(\Int(B)) {}$

Let $f:X\to{}Y {}$ be open, and let ${} B \subseteq Y {}$. Now if ${} x \in f^{-1}(\conj{B}) {}$, then if ${} U(x)$ is an neighbourhood, then 
$$
f(U \cap  f^{-1}(B))=f(U) \cap  B
$$
and since $f$ is open, then $f(U) {}$ is open, and in particular a neighbourhood of ${} f(x)$. Therefore, since ${} f(x) \in \conj{B} {}$, then ${} f(U) \cap  B\neq \varnothing  {}$, and so ${} U \cap  f^{-1}(B) \neq \varnothing  {}$. Therefore, ${} x \in \conj{f^{-1}(B)} {}$. 

Now suppose that ${} f^{-1}(\conj{B}) \subseteq \conj{f^{-1}(B)} {}$ for $f:X\to{}Y {}$. Then if ${} B \subseteq Y {}$, 
$$
\begin{align}
 f^{-1}(\Fr(B))  & =f^{-1}(\conj{B} \cap  \conj{\mathscr{C}B}) \\
 & =f^{-1}(\conj{B}) \cap  f^{-1}(\conj{\mathscr{C}B}) \\
 & \subseteq \conj{f^{-1}(B)} \cap  \conj{ f^{-1}(\mathscr{C}B)} \\
 & =\conj{f^{-1}(B)} \cap  \conj{\mathscr{C} f^{-1}(B)} \\
 & =\Fr(f^{-1}(B))  
 \end{align}
$$

Finally suppose that ${} f^{-1}(\Fr(B)) \subseteq \Fr(f^{-1}(B)) {}$ for $f:X\to{}Y {}$, then if ${} A \subseteq X {}$, then ${} A \subseteq f^{-1}(f(A)) {}$, and so
$$
\Int(A) \cap \Fr(f^{-1}(f(A))) \subseteq \Int(f^{-1}(f(A))) \cap  \Fr(f^{-1}(f(A))) =\varnothing 
$$
therefore,
$$
f(\Int(A)) \cap  \Fr(f(A))=f(\Int(A) \cap  f^{-1}(\Fr(f(A)))) \subseteq f(\Int(A) \cap \Fr(f^{-1}(f(A))))=\varnothing 
$$
so ${} f(\Int(A)) \subseteq \Int(f(A)) {}$, as ${} f(\Int(A)) \subseteq f(A)=\Int(f(A)) \cup \Fr(f(A)) {}$ as a disjoint union. Thus, ${} f$ is open. 
7. 
Let $f:X\to{}Y {}$ and $g:Y\to{}Z {}$.
a) skip
b)
Suppose that ${} g \circ  f {}$ is open (closed), and ${} f {}$ is continuous and surjective. Then if ${} B \subseteq Y {}$ is open (closed), we have ${} A=f^{-1}(B) {}$ is open, and so ${} g(A)=g(f(f^{-1}(A)))=(g\circ f)(A) {}$ is open (closed), since ${} f(f^{-1}(A))=A {}$ since $f$ is surjective. Therefore, $g$ is open (closed).
c)
Suppose that ${} g \circ  f {}$ is open (closed), and $g$ is continuous and injective. Then if ${} B \subseteq Y {}$, then ${} g^{-1}(g(B))=B {}$, and if $g(B) {}$ is open (closed) in $Z$ then so is ${} B {}$ in $Y {}$. Now if ${} A \subseteq X {}$, then ${} f(A)=g^{-1}(g(f(A))) {}$ is open (closed), since ${} g(f(A))$ is open (closed). 
8. skip
9. skip
10. 
Let ${} p:X \to{}Y {}$ be surjective. Suppose that we have ${} S \subseteq Y {}$ and a open ${} U \supseteq p^{-1}(S) {}$, then there exists some open ${} V \supseteq S {}$ such that ${} p^{-1}(V) \subseteq U {}$. Now let ${} A \subseteq X {}$, and let ${} y \in \conj{p(A)} {}$. Then if ${} p^{-1}(\{y\}) \subseteq U {}$ for some open $U {}$, we get an open set ${} y \in {} V {}$ such that ${} p^{-1}(\{ y \}) \subseteq p^{-1}(V) \subseteq U {}$. Since $p {}$ is surjective, then ${} p^{-1}(\{ y \}) {}$ is non-empty. Then ${} V \cap p(A) {}$ is non-empty, and so for each ${} x \in p^{-1}(\{ y \}) {}$, $U$ is an neighbourhood of $x$, and 
$$
p(U \cap  A) \supseteq p(p^{-1}(V) \cap A)=V \cap p(A)\neq \varnothing 
$$
Therefore, ${} x \in \conj{A} {}$, so ${} y \in p(\conj{A}) {}$. Therefore, $p$ is closed. 
11. 
Let ${} y \in \Fr(p(\conj{U})) {}$. Then 
$$
\begin{align}
 \Fr(p(\conj{U})) & =\conj{p(\conj{U})} \cap \conj{\mathscr{C}p(\conj{U})}   \\
 & \subseteq  p(\conj{U}) \cap  \conj{p(\mathscr{C}\conj{U}) } \\
 & \subseteq p(\conj{U}) \cap \conj{p(\mathscr{C}U)} \\
 & =p(\conj{U}) \cap  p(\mathscr{C}U)
 \end{align}
$$
12. skip
13. skip
14. 
($a\Rightarrow b {}$) Let ${} U \subseteq X {}$ be open. Then if ${} y \in \mathscr{A}(U)=\{ y \in Y\mid p^{-1}(y) \subseteq U \} {}$, there exists some open ${} V \subseteq Y {}$ such that ${} p^{-1}(y) \subseteq p^{-1}(V) \subseteq U {}$. Therefore, if ${} z \in V {}$, then ${} p^{-1}(z)\subseteq U {}$, and so ${} z \in A {}$. Therefore, ${} x \in V \subseteq A {}$, and $A {}$ is open.

(${} b\Rightarrow c {}$). Let ${} A \subseteq X {}$ be closed, and let ${} \mathscr{B}(A)=\{ y \in Y \mid  p^{-1}(y) \cap  A \neq \varnothing  \} {}$. Now let ${} y \notin  \mathscr{B}(A) {}$. Then ${} p^{-1}(y) \cap A =\varnothing {}$, so ${} p^{-1}(y) \subseteq \mathscr{C}A {}$, which is open, so ${} \mathscr{A}(\mathscr{C}A) {}$ is open. Now if ${} z \in \mathscr{A}(\mathscr{C}A) {}$. Then ${} f^{-1}(z) \subseteq \mathscr{C}A {}$, so ${} f^{-1}(z) \cap  A=\varnothing  {}$, and ${} z \notin \mathscr{B}(A) {}$, and thus ${} \mathscr{A}(\mathscr{C}A) \cap   {}$