---
tags:
  - exercises
  - topo_dugundji
date: 
count: 26
---
[[Directory]], [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Topology Dugundji|Subject Directory]]
[[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/3.1. Topological spaces.md|🞀🞀]] [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/3.7. Relativization.md|◀]] [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/3.9. Piecewise definition of maps.md|▶]] [[Textbooks/Undergraduate/Second Year/Topology Dugundji/Exercises/3.12. Homeomorphism.md|🞂🞂]]
1. 
We have that ${} \{ 1 \} {}$ is open in $2$, but ${} f^{-1}(\{ 1 \})=\{ 1 \} {}$ is not open in $\mathscr{S} {}$, and so $f {}$ is not continuous
2. 
Let ${} a \in [0,\, 1) {}$, and let ${} W {}$ be a neighbourhood of ${} c(a)=1 {}$. That is, ${} W=\{ 1 \} {}$ or ${} W=\{ 0,\, 1 \}. {}$ If $W=\{ 1 \} {}$, then ${} V=[0,\, 1) =(-1,\, 1) \cap [0,\, 1] {}$ is an open neighbourhood in ${} [0,\, 1] {}$ of ${} a {}$ such that ${} c(V)=\{ 1 \} \subseteq W {}$. Otherwise, if ${} W=\{ 0,\, 1 \} {}$, then let $V {}$ be any subset of ${} [0,\, 1] {}$. then ${} c(V) \subseteq W {}$. Therefore, $c {}$ is continuous at ${} a \in [0,\, 1) {}$.

Now if ${} W {}$ is an neighbourhood of ${} c(1)=0 {}$, then ${} W=\{ 0 \} {}$ or ${} W=\{ 0,\, 1 \} {}$. If ${} W=\{ 0 \} {}$, then suppose that given an open ${} A\subseteq [0,\, 1] {}$, then ${} c(A)=\{ 0 \} {}$. Then ${} A \cap [0,\, 1)=\varnothing  {}$, and so ${} A \subseteq \{ 1 \} {}$. Then ${} A=\varnothing  {}$, and so ${} c(A)=\varnothing  {}$, or ${} A=\{ 1 \} {}$, which is closed in ${} [0,\, 1] {}$. Therefore, $c$ is not continuous at $1$. 
3. 
Suppose that ${} A \subseteq X {}$ is clopen. Let ${} V \subseteq \mathbb{R} {}$ be an open set such. Now if ${} V \cap  \{ 0,\, 1 \}=\varnothing  {}$, then ${} c_{A}^{-1}(V) =\varnothing  {}$ is open. If ${} V \cap  \{ 0,\, 1 \}=\{ 0 \}  {}$, then ${} c_{A}^{-1}(V)=\mathscr{C}A {}$ is open, since $A$ is closed. If ${} V \cap  \{ 0,\, 1 \}=\{ 1 \} {}$, then ${} c_{A}^{-1}(V)=A {}$ is open, since $A$ is open. Finally, if ${} V \cap  \{ 0,\, 1 \}=\{ 0,\, 1 \} {}$, then ${} c_{A}^{-1}(V)=X {}$ is open. Therefore $c_{A}$ is continuous

Conversely, suppose that $c_{A}$ is continuous. Then let ${} V \subseteq \mathbb{R} {}$ be open such that ${} V \cap  \{ 0,\, 1 \}=\{ 0 \} {}$. Then ${} c_{A}^{-1}(V)=\mathscr{C}A {}$. Then since $V$ is open, then $\mathscr{C}A$ is open and $A$ is closed. Furthermore, if ${} V \cap  \{ 0,\, 1 \}=\{ 1 \} {}$, then ${} c_{A}^{-1}(V)=A {}$, and since $V$ is again open, then $A$ is open, and so $A$ is clopen. 
4. skip
5. We must have that neither ${} \mathcal{T}_{1} \subseteq \mathcal{T}_{2} {}$ or ${} \mathcal{T}_{2} \subseteq \mathcal{T}_{1} {}$. 
6. 
Let $f:X\to{}X {}$. Suppose $f {}$ is continuous. Then if ${} x \in X {}$, then ${} \mathscr{C}\{ x \} {}$ is open, and so ${} \mathscr{C}f^{-1}(\mathscr{C}\{ x \}) {}$ is finite. Now
$$
\begin{align}
 \mathscr{C} f^{-1}(X-\{ x \})   & =\mathscr{C}(f^{-1}(X)-f^{-1}(\{ x \})) \\
 & =\mathscr{C}(f^{-1}(X) \cap  \mathscr{C}f^{-1}(\{ x \})) \\
 & =\mathscr{C}f^{-1}(X) \cup f^{-1}(\{ x \})
 \end{align}
$$
since ${} \mathscr{C}f^{-1}(X) {}$ is finite, then ${} f^{-1}(\{ x \}) {}$ must be finite.

Conversely, suppose that for all ${} x \in X {}$, then ${} f^{-1}(\{ x \}) {}$ is finite. Then let ${} W \subseteq X {}$ be open. Now since $\mathscr{C}W {}$ is finite, then
$$
f^{-1}(\mathscr{C}W)=\bigcup_{w\in \mathscr{C}W} f^{-1}(\{ w \})
$$
is a finite union of finite sets, and therefore finite. Therefore, 
$$
f^{-1}(\mathscr{C}W)=f^{-1}(X) \cap  \mathscr{C}f^{-1}(W)
$$
and since $X$ is infinite, then ${} f^{-1}(X)=X {}$ is infinite, and so ${} \mathscr{C}f^{-1}(W) {}$ must be finite. therefore, $f {}$ is continuous. 

Therefore, ${} f$ is continuous iff ${} f^{-1}(\{ x \}) {}$ is finite for all ${} x \in X {}$
7. 
Let $f:X\to{}X {}$ be order preserving. Let ${} V \subseteq X {}$ be open. Then let ${} x \in f^{-1}(V) {}$, and let ${} y \prec x {}$. Then ${} f(y)\prec f(x) {}$, and so ${} f(y) \in V {}$ as ${} f(x) \in V {}$. Therefore, ${} y \in f^{-1}(V) {}$.

Conversely, let $f {}$ be continuous. Then let ${} x,\, y \in X {}$ with $y\prec x$, then if $V$ is a neighbourhood containing ${} f(x) {}$, then there must exist a neighbourhood ${} W {}$ of ${} x$ such that ${} f(W) \subseteq V {}$. Then ${} y \in W {}$, and so ${} f(y) \in V {}$. Suppose that ${} f(y) \not \prec  f(x) {}$. Then there exists a neighbourhood of ${} f(x)$ that does not contain ${} f(y)$, by taking an neighbourhood of ${} f(x)$ and removing all elements ${} m\succ f(y)$. However, this is a contradiction, as every neighbourhood of ${} f(x)$ contains ${} f(y)$. Therefore, ${} f(y)\prec f(x) {}$, and $f$ is order preserving
8. skip
9. skip
10. 
(${} a\Rightarrow b {}$). Let ${} A \subseteq X {}$, and let ${} x \in f(A') {}$, so $x=f(y)$. Let $W$ be an neighbourhood of $x {}$, so ${} f^{-1}(W) {}$ is an neighbourhood of $y$. Therefore, ${} f^{-1}(W)-\{ y \} \cap  A\neq \varnothing  {}$, say, ${} z \in f^{-1}(W),\, z \in A {}$. Then ${} f(z) \in W,\, f(z) \in f(A) {}$, and ${} W \cap  f(A)\neq \varnothing  {}$, so ${} x \in \conj{f(A)} {}$

(${} b\Rightarrow a {}$). Let ${} B \subseteq Y {}$ be closed Then let ${} A=f^{-1}(B) {}$, and so ${} f(A') \subseteq \conj{f(A)}=\conj{f(f^{-1}(B))}=\conj{f(X) \cap  B}\subseteq \conj{B}=B {}$ thus ${} f^{-1}(B)' \subseteq f^{-1}(B) {}$, and so ${} f^{-1}(B) {}$ is closed. Therefore, $f {}$ is continuous

(${} a\Rightarrow c {}$). We have
$$
\begin{align}
f^{-1}(\Fr(B)) & =f^{-1}(\conj{B} \cap  \conj{\mathscr{C}B}) \\
 & =f^{-1}(\conj{B})\cap  f^{-1}(\conj{\mathscr{C}B}) \\
 & \supseteq \conj{f^{-1}(B)} \cap  \conj{f^{-1}(\mathscr{C}B)} \\
 & \supseteq \conj{f^{-1}(B)} \cap  \conj{f^{-1}(Y-B)} \\
 &  \supseteq \conj{f^{-1}(B)} \cap  \conj{f^{-1}(Y)-f^{-1}(B)} \\
 & \supseteq \conj{f^{-1}(B)} \cap  \conj{ \mathscr{C}f^{-1}(B)} \\
 & \supseteq \Fr(f^{-1}(B))
\end{align}
$$
(${} c\Rightarrow a {}$). Let ${} B \subseteq Y {}$ be closed. Then 
$$
f^{-1}(B) \supseteq f^{-1}(\Fr(B)) \supseteq \Fr(f^{-1}(B))
$$
and so $f^{-1}(B) {}$ contains it's boundary. Therefore, $f^{-1}(B) {}$ is closed. 
11. 
Let ${} x \in X_{1} \cap  X_{2} {}$, and let $W$ be a neighbourhood of ${} f(x)$. Then ${} W \cap X_{1} {}$ is an neighbourhood of ${} f(x)$, and so there exists some neighbourhood $V_{1} {}$ of ${} x {}$ such that ${} f(V_{1}) \subseteq  W \cap  X_{1} {}$. Likewise, there exists some neighbourhood ${} V_{2} {}$ of $x$ such that ${} f(V_{2}) \subseteq  W \cap  X_{2} {}$. Now let ${} V=V_{1} \cup  V_{2} {}$, which is an neighbourhood of $x {}$, and so 
$$
f(V)=f(V_{1} \cup  V_{2}) = f(V_{1}) \cup  f(V_{2}) \subseteq (W \cap X_{1}) \cup  (W \cap  X_{2})=W
$$
and so $f$ is continuous at $x$.
12. 
Consider ${} f:\mathbb{R}\to{}\{ 0,\, 1 \} {}$ defined by
$$
f(x)=\begin{cases}
0 &  x<1 \\
1  & x\geq 1
\end{cases}
$$
and let ${} A=\{ 1 \} {}$. Then the relative topology of $A$ is discrete, and so every map is continuous. However, let $W$ be a neighbourhood of ${} 1 \in \{ 0,\, 1 \} {}$. Then ${} W=\{ 1 \} {}$, or ${} \{ 0,\, 1 \} {}$. If ${} W=\{ 1 \} {}$, then suppose that $V$ is an neighbourhood of $1$ such that ${} f(V)\subseteq \{ 1 \} {}$. Then ${} V {}$ must contain $1$, but may not contain any numbers less than one. Since $V$ is open, then this is impossible, and so $f$ is not continuous at $1$.
13. skip
14. skip